








































Ministry of Environment and Forests


 

 

Ministry of Environment and Forests 
 

NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 03rd February, 2004 

 

G.S.R. 94  (E) – In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Forest 

(Conservation) Act, 1980 (69 of 1980), the Central Government hereby makes the following rules to  

amend the Forest (Conservation) Rules, 2003, namely :- 

1.  (1)     These rules may be called the Forest (Conservation) Amendment Rules, 2004. 

     (2)    Rules 1,2,3,5,6 (except sub-rule (5) of rule 6) and 7 of these rules shall come into force on the 

date of their publication in the official Gazette; whereas, rule 4 of these rules and sub-rule (5) 

of rule 6 of the principal rules, as contained in rule 5 of these rules, shall come into force on 

the expiry of 180 days from the date of such publication. 

2. In the Forest (Conservation) Rules, 2003 (hereinafter referred to as  the said rules), in  rule 2, 

for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted , namely :– 

‘ (b) “Committee” means the Forest Advisory Committee constituted under 

section 3 of the Act.’ 

3. In the said rules, for rule 3 , the following rule shall substituted, namely : – 

“3.       Composition of the Forest Advisory Committee : - 

     (1) The Forest Advisory Committee shall be composed of the following members, 

namely : 

            (i)    the Director General of Forests, Ministry of Environment and Forests – 

Chairperson. 

            (ii)   the Additional Director General of Forests, Ministry of Environment and 

Forests – Member. 



 

 

2
(iii) the Additional Commissioner (Soil Conservation), Ministry of Agriculture 

– Member. 

(iv) three non-official members who shall be experts one each in Mining, Civil 

Engineering and Development Economics  -   Members. 

(v) the Inspector General of Forests (Forest Conservation), Ministry of 

Environment and Forests – Member Secretary. 

(2) The Additional Director General of Forests shall act as Chairperson in the 

absence of the Director General of Forests.” 

   (4)        In the said rules, after rule 3, the following rule shall be inserted, namely : - 

Constitution of the Regional Empowered Committee  : – 

(1) A  Regional Empowered Committee shall be constituted at each of the Regional 

Offices and shall consist of the following members, namely :  

                                (i)  the Regional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Central)  -   

Chairperson.   

    (ii) three non-official members who shall be experts one each in Mining, Civil 

Engineering and Development Economics  -   Members. 

   (iii) the Conservator of Forests or the Deputy Conservator of Forests in the 

Regional Office  -  Member Secretary. 

(2) The term of appointment of non-official  Members shall be as  specified in rule 4 

of these rules. 

5. In the said rules, for rule 6 , the following rule shall be substituted, namely – 

“ 6.     Submission of proposals seeking approval of the Central Government under section 

2 of the Act  

(1) Every User Agency who want to use any forest land for non-forestry purposes, 

shall make its proposal in the relevant Form appended to these rules, i.e. Form 



 

 

3
‘A’ for proposals seeking first time approval under the Act, and Form ‘B’ for 

proposals seeking renewal of leases, where approval of the Central Government 

under the Act had already been obtained, to the Nodal Officer of the concerned 

State Government or the Union territory Administration, as the case may be, 

along with requisite information and documents, complete in all respects.  

(2) The User Agency  shall  endorse a copy of the proposal, along with a copy of the 

receipt obtained from the office of the  Nodal Officer, to the concerned Divisional 

Forest Officer or the Conservator of Forests, Regional Office, as well as the 

Monitoring Cell of the Forest Conservation Division of the Ministry of 

Environment and Forests, Paryavaran Bhawan, CGO Complex, New Delhi - 

110003. 

(3)  (a)  After having received the proposal, the State Government or the Union 

territory Administration, as the case may be, shall process and forward it to 

the Central Government within a period of  two hundred and ten days of  the 

receipt of the proposal  including the transit period.  

  (b) The Nodal Officer of State Government or as the case may be, the Union 

territory Administration, after having received the proposal under sub-rule (1) 

and on being satisfied that the proposal is complete in all respects and requires 

prior approval under section 2 of the Act, shall send the proposal to the 

concerned Divisional Forest Officer within a period of ten days of the receipt of 

the  proposal : 

      Provided that on the determination regarding completeness of the proposal or 

the expiry of ten days, whichever is earlier, the question of completeness or 

otherwise of the proposal shall not be raised. 



 

 

4
 (c) If the Nodal Officer of the State Government or the Union territory 

Administration, as the case may be, finds that the proposal is incomplete, he 

shall return it within the period of ten days  as specified under clause (b), to the 

User Agency and this time period shall not be counted for any future 

reference.  

(d) The Divisional Forest Officer or the Conservator of Forests shall examine the 

factual details and feasibility of the proposal, certify the maps, carry out site-

inspection and enumeration of the trees and forward his findings in the 

Format specified in this regard to the Nodal Officer within a period of ninety 

days of  the receipt of such proposal from him. 

(e) (i)   The Nodal Officer, through the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, 

shall forward the proposal to State Government or the Union territory 

Administration, as the case may be,  alongwith his recommendations, 

within a period of thirty days of the receipt of such proposal from the 

Divisional Forest Officer or the Conservator of Forests. 

   (ii)        The State Government or the Union territory Administration, as the case 

may be, shall forward the complete proposal, alongwith its 

recommendations, to the Regional Office or the Ministry of Environment 

and Forests, Paryavaran Bhawan, CGO Complex, New Delhi – 110003, as 

the case may be, in the specified  Forms within a period of sixty days of 

the receipt of the  proposal from the Nodal Officer :  

               Provided that all proposals involving clearing of naturally grown trees on 

the forest land or a portion thereof for the purpose of using it for 

reforestation shall be sent  in the form of Working Plan or Management 

Plan. 



 

 

5
 Provided further that the concerned State Government or as the case 

may be, the Union territory Administration, shall simultaneously send the 

intimation to the User Agency about forwarding of the proposal, 

alongwith its recommendations, to the Regional Office or the Ministry of 

Environment and Forests, as the case may be. 

(f) If the proposal, alongwith the recommendations, is not received from the 

concerned State Government or the Union territory Administration, as the 

case may be, till fifteen days of the expiry of the time limit as specified under 

clause (a), it shall be construed that the concerned State Government or as 

the case may be, the Union territory Administration, has rejected the 

proposal and the concerned State Government or the Union territory 

Administration shall inform the User Agency accordingly : 

Provided that in case the State Government or the Union territory 

Administration, as the case may be, subsequently forward the proposal, 

alongwith its recommendations, to the Regional Office or the Ministry of 

Environment and Forests, as the case may be, the proposal shall not be 

considered by the Central Government unless an explanation for the delay to 

the satisfaction of the Central Government is furnished, together with action 

taken against any individual held to be responsible for the delay.  

(4) The proposal referred to in clause (e) (ii) of sub-rule (3), involving forest land 

upto forty hectares  other than the proposal relating to mining and 

encroachments, shall be forwarded by the concerned State Government or as the 

case may be, the Union territory Administration, alongwith its 

recommendations, to the Chief Conservator of Forests or the Conservator of 

Forests of the concerned Regional Office of the Ministry of Environment and 



 

 

6
Forests, Government of India, who shall within a period of forty five days of  

the receipt of the proposal fron the concerned State Government or the Union 

territory Administration, as the case may be (a) decide the diversion proposal 

upto five hectares and (b) process, scrutinise and forward  diversion proposal of 

more than five hectares and upto forty hectares, along with the 

recommendations, if any, to the Ministry of Environment and Forests, 

Paryavaran Bhawan, CGO Complex, New Delhi – 110003, for obtaining the 

decision of the Central Government and inform the State Government or the 

Union territory Administration, as the case may be, and the User Agency 

concerned. 

(5) The Regional Empowered Committee shall decide the proposal involving 

diversion of forest land upto forty hectares other than the proposal relating to 

mining and encroachments,  within forty-five days of the receipt of such 

proposal from the State Government or the Union territory Administration, as 

the case may be: 

  Provided that the Central Government may, if consider it necessary, enhance or 

reduce the limit  of the area of the forest land. 

    (6)   The proposal referred to in clause (e) (ii) of sub-rule (3), involving forest land of 

more than forty  hectares, and all proposal relating to mining and  

encroachments irrespective of the area of the forest land involved, shall be 

forwarded by the concerned State Government or as the case may be, the Union 

territory Administration, alongwith its recommendations, to the Ministry of 

Environment and Forests, Paryavaran Bhawan, CGO Complex, New Delhi - 

110003.” 

6. In the said rules, in rule 7, : - 



 

 

7
(i) in sub-rule (1) for the words, brackets and figures “sub-rule (3) of rule 6”, the words, 

brackets and figures “sub-rule (6) of rule 6” shall be substituted. 

(ii) After sub-rule (1), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely :- 

          “ (1A)  These proposals shall be processed and put up before the Committee and  the 

recommendations of the Committee shall be placed within a period of ninety days of the 

receipt of such proposals from the State Government or the Union territory 

Administration, as the case may be, before the Central Government  for its decision.” 

  (iii)   in sub-rule (2), in clauses (c) and (d), at both places, for the words, “or the other 

authority”, the words “or the Union territory Administration, as the case may be,” shall be 

substituted. 

7. In the said rules, rule 8 shall be omitted. 

[File No. 5-5/98-FC] 
 
 

(Dr. V.K. BAHUGUNA)  
Inspector General of Forests (Forest Conservation) 

 

 Note : The Principal rules were published in the Gazette of India vide number G.S.R.  23 (E) dated 

the 10th January, 2003. 


