






































Microsoft Word - Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999


The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999 

The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
1. Short title and commencement.— 
(1) These rules may be called the Granite Conservation and 
Development Rules, 1999. 
(2) They shall come into force from the date of their publication in the 
Official Gazette. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
2. Application.—These rules shall apply to prospecting and quarrying of 
granite. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
3. Definitions.— 
(1) In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “Act” means the Mines and Minerals 2[(Development and 
Regulation)] Act, 1957 (67 of 1957); 
(b) “agent” when used in relation to a quarry, means any person whether 
appointed as such or not, who acts as the representative of the owner in 
respect of the management of the quarry or any part thereof; 
(c) “development” means removing overburden or unproductive or 
waste materials as preparatory to mining; 
(d) “drilling” means the penetration of alluvial material, rocks or 
formations by holes for obtaining geological information and for 
drawing samples therefrom; 
(e) “environment” and “environmental pollution” shall have the same 
meanings assigned respectively to these terms in the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986 (29 of 1986); 
(f) “Form” means a Form set forth in Schedule to these rules; 
(g) “geologist” means a person appointed in writing by the prospecting 
licensee, owner or agent to perform the duties of a geologist under these 
rules; 
(h) “granite” means dolerites, granite geneisses, migmatities, gabbros, 
anorthosites, rhyolites, syenites, leptynites, charnockites and any other 
igneous and orthometamorphic rock types which are— 
(i) amenable to be recovered as dimensional stone; 
(ii) capable of taking polish; and 
(iii) commercially exploitable. 
(i) “lease” means a lease granted for the purpose of undertaking mining 
or quarryung operations for granite; 



(j) “manager” when used in relation to a mine or a quarry, means any 
person appointed by the owner or agent and includes the owner or the 
agent if he appoints himself to be such manager, under section 17 of the 
Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952); 
(k) “mining engineer” means a person appointed in writing by the owner 
or agent to perform the duties of a mining engineer under these rules; 
(l) “prospect” means an area where existence of granite has been 
established. 
(m) “prospecting licence” means a licence granted for the purpose of 
undertaking any operation for the purpose of exploring, locating or 
proving granite deposits; 
(n) “quarry” means an opencast working as defined in Mines Act, 1952 
(35 of 1952); 
(o) “recognised person” means a qualified person granted recognition by 
the competent authority under these rules to prepare mining plan; 
(p) “sheet rock” means massive granite bodies but does not include 
boulders; 
(q) “year” means the twelve months period beginning from the first day 
of April and ending on the thirty-first day of March of the following 
year. 
(2) All other words and expressions used in these rules but not defined 
shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Act. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
4. Prospecting to precede mining operations.—No lease shall be granted 
by the State Government unless it is satisfied that there is evidence to 
show that the area for which the lease is applied for has been prospected 
earlier for granite of the existence of granite therein has been established 
otherwise. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
5. Period for which prospecting licence may be granted or renewed.—
The period for which a prospecting licence may be granted shall not 
exceed two years. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
6. Period for which leases may be granted or renewed.— 
(1) The maximum period for which a lease may be granted shall not 
exceed thirty years: Provided that the minimum period for which any 
such lease may be granted shall not be less than twenty years. 
(2) A lease may be renewed for a period not exceeding twenty years. 



(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (2), if the State 
Government is of the opinion that in the interest of development of 
granite it is necessary to do so, it may, for reasons to be recorded, 
authorise the renewal of a lease for a further period or periods not 
exceeding twenty years in each case. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
7. Minimum and maximum area for grant of a mining lease.— 
(1) The minimum area that may be granted or renewed under a lease for 
ensuring mining activities to optimum depth shall not be less than one 
hectare; 
(2) The maximum area that may be granted under a mining lease shall 
not exceed fifty hectares: Provided that the State Government, if it is 
satisfied on the basis of proposed production level, geological or 
topographical conditions, may for the reasons to be recorded in writing, 
grant or renew a lease over an area more than the maximum area or less 
than the minimum area specified under this rule. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
8. Scheme of prospecting.— 
(1) Every holder of a prospecting licence for granite shall submit to the 
State Government or any person authorised in this behalf by that 
Government within a period of sixty days from the date of execution of 
the prospecting licence, a scheme of prospecting indicating the manner 
in which he proposes to carry out the prospecting operation, in the area 
covered by the licence and the scheme shall incorporate the following, 
namely:— 
(a) particulars of the area; 
(b) the scale of the plan and the area of geological mapping; 
(c) the number of pits, trenches, and bore holes which he proposes to put 
in the area and the locations thereof; 
(d) the particulars of the machines to be used; 
(e) the details of exploratory mining to be undertaken; 
(f) the number of samples proposed to be drawn and tested; 
(g) baseline information of prevailing environmental conditions before 
the beginning of the prospecting operations; 
(h) any other matter relevant for the preparation of a scheme of 
prospecting, as directed by the State Government or any person so 
authorised from time to time by a general or specific order. 



(2) The prospecting scheme under sub-rule (1) shall be prepared by a 
recognised person or a geologist or a mining engineer employed under 
clause (a) of sub-rule (1) of rule 38. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
9. Modification of scheme of prospecting.— 
(1) A prospecting scheme prepared and submitted under rule 8 may be 
modified at any time on geological considerations by the holder of a 
prospecting licence during continuance of the prospecting licence. 
(2) Any modification carried out under sub-rule (1) shall be intimated to 
the State Government or any person authorised in this behalf by that 
Government, by the holder of a prospecting licence within a period of 
fifteen days. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
10. Prospecting operations to be carried out in accordance with scheme 
of prospecting.—Every holder of a prospecting licence for granite shall 
carry out the prospecting operations in accordance with the scheme of 
prospecting submitted under rule 8 or with such modifications, if any, as 
intimated under rule 9 or as directed by the State Government or any 
person authorised by that Government in this behalf. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
11. Report of prospecting operations.— 
(1) Every holder of a prospecting licence for granite shall submit to the 
State Government or any person authorised in this behalf by that 
Government 1[***] an annual report in Form A so as to reach them by 
30th April for the previous year: Provided that a report in Form A shall 
be submitted within a period of three months after the completion of 
abandonment of the prospecting operations or the expiry of the 
prospecting licence, whichever is earlier. 
(2) Where prospecting operations for granite are carried out by any 
authority specified in the second proviso to sub-section (1) of section 4 
of the Act without a prospecting licence, such authority shall submit the 
annual report in Form A to the State Government or any person 
authorised by that Government 1[***] in respect of each area where 
prospecting operations for granite have been undertaken by them: 
Provided that this sub-rule shall not apply in a case where field 
operations consist of only geological mapping or geo-physical or geo-
chemical investigations. 2[(3) The State Government or any person 
authorized in this behalf by that Government shall forward a copy, each 



of the annual report in Form A received under sub-rule (1) or sub-rule 
(2), as the case may be, to the Controller General, India Bureau of 
Mines, within thirty days from the date of such receipt.] 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
12. Mining plan as a pre-requisite to the grant of lease.—No lease shall 
be granted or renewed by the State Government unless there is a mining 
plan duly approved by the State Government or any person authorised in 
this behalf by that Government for the development of the granite 
deposit in the area concerned. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
13. Mining plan to be prepared by a recognised person.— 
(1) No mining plan shall be approved unless it is prepared by a qualified 
person recognised in this behalf by the State Government or any person 
authorised by that Government or by a recognised person under rule 
22B of the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960. 
(2) No person shall be granted recognition for the purposes of sub-rule 
(1) by the State Government or any person authorised by that 
Government unless he holds— 
(i) a degree in mining engineering or a post-graduate degree in geology 
granted by a university established or incorporated by or under an Act of 
Parliament or any institution recognised by the University Grants 
Commission established under section 4 of the University Grants 
Commission Act, 1956 (3 of 1956) or any qualification equivalent 
thereto; and 
(ii) professional experience of five years of working in a supervisory 
capacity in the field of mining or mineral administration after obtaining 
a degree or qualification required under clause (i). 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
14. Grant recognition by State Government.— 
(1) Any person possessing the qualifications and experience required 
under sub-rule (2) of rule 13 may apply for recognition to the competent 
authority designated by the State Government for this purpose. 
(2) The competent authority after making such enquiry as it deems fit, 
may grant or refuse to grant recognition and where recognition is 
refused, the competent authority shall record reasons in writing and 
communicate the same to the applicant. 
(3) A recognition shall be granted for an intial period of ten years and 
may be renewed for further periods not exceeding ten years at a time: 



Provided that the competent authority may refuse to renew recognition 
for reasons to be recorded in writing after giving an opportunity of 
hearing to the person concerned. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
15. Approval and submission of mining plan.—On receipt of the 
application for grant of mining lease for undertaking mining operations 
for granite, the State Government shall take decision to grant precise 
area for the said purpose and communicate such decision to the 
applicant and on receipt of the communication from the State 
Government of the precise area to be granted, the applicant shall submit 
a mining plan within a period of three months from the date on which 
such communication is received or such other period as may be allowed 
by the State Government for approval and the said mining plan shall 
incorporate— 
(i) the plan of the precise area showing the nature and extent of the 
granite body; spot or spots where the excavation is to be done in the first 
year and its extent; a detailed cross-section and detailed plan of spots of 
excavation based on the prospecting data gathered by the applicant; a 
tentative scheme of mining for the first five years of the lease; 
(ii) details of the geology and lithology of the precise area including 
granite reserves of the area; 
(iii) the extent of manual mining or mining by the use of machinery and 
mechanical devices on the precise area; 
(iv) the plan of the precise area showing natural water courses, limits of 
reserved and other forest areas and density of trees, if any, assessment of 
impact of mining activity on forest, land surface and environment 
including air and water pollution; details of scheme for restoration of the 
area by afforestation, land reclamation, use of pollution control devices 
and of such other measures as may be directed by the Central or the 
State Government from time to time; 
(v) annual programme and plan for excavation on the precise area from 
year to year for five years; 
(vi) any other matter which the State Government or any person so 
authorised may require the applicant to provide in the mining plan. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
16. Mining plan as a pre-requisite to the commencement of mining 
operations.— 



(1) No person shall commence mining operations for granite in any area 
except in accordance with a mining plan approved under these rules. 
(2) The State Government or any person authorised in this behalf by that 
Government may require the holder of a lease to make such 
modifications in the mining plan referred to in sub-rule (1) or impose 
such conditions as it considers necessary by an order in writing if such 
modifications or imposition of conditions are considered necessary in 
the light of the experience of operation of mining plan or in view of the 
change in the technological development. 
(3) A holder of a lease, desirous of seeking modifications in the 
approved mining plan as are considered expedient, in the interest of safe 
and scientific mining, conservation of granite, or for the protection of 
environment, shall apply to the State Government or any person 
authorised in this behalf by that Government, setting forth the intended 
modifications and explaining the reasons for the same. 
(4) The State Government or any person authorised in this behalf by that 
Government may approve the modifications under sub-rule (3) or 
approve with such alterations as it may consider expedient. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
17. Mining plan to be submitted by the existing lessee.— 
(1) Where mining operations for granite have been undertaken before 
the commencement of these rules without an approved mining plan, the 
holder of such lease shall submit a mining plan within a period of one 
year from the date of commencement of these rules, to the State 
Government or any person authorised in this behalf by that Government 
for its approval. 
(2) If a holder of a lease has not been able to submit the mining plan 
within the specified time for reasons beyond his control, he may apply 
for extension of time giving reasons to the State Government or any 
person authorised in this behalf by that Government. 
(3) The State Government or any person authorised in this behalf by that 
Government on receiving an application made under sub-rule (2) may, 
on being satisfied, extend the period for submission of the mining plan 
for a period which may not exceed 1[four years]. 
(4) The State Government or any person authorised in this behalf by that 
Government may approve the mining plan submitted by the lessee under 
sub-rule (1), or may require modifications to be carried out in the 
mining plan and the lessee shall carry out such modifications and 



resubmit the modified mining plan for approval of the State Government 
or the person so authorised, as the case may be. 
(5) The State Government or any person authorised in this behalf by that 
Government shall, within a period of ninety days from the date of 
receipt of the mining plan or the modified plan, convey its or his 
approval or disapproval to the applicant and in case of disapproval it or 
he shall also convey the reasons for disapproving the said mining plan 
or the modified mining plan. 
(6) If no decision is conveyed within the period stipulated under sub-
rule (5), the mining plan or the modified mining plan, as the case may 
be, shall be deemed to have been provisionally approved and such 
approval shall be subject to the final decision whenever communicated. 
(7) The mining plan submitted under sub-rule (1) shall be prepared by a 
recognised person. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
18. Review of mining plan.— 
(1) Every mining plan duly approved under these rules shall be valid for 
the entire duration of the lease. 
(2) The owner, agent, mining engineer or manager of every mine or 
quarry shall review the mining plan as prescribed under sub-rule (1) and 
submit a scheme of mining for the next five years of the lease to the 
State Government or any person authorised in this behalf by that 
Government for approval. 
(3) The scheme of mining shall be submitted to the State Government or 
any person authorised in this behalf by that Government at least one 
hundred twenty days before the expiry of the five years’ period, for 
which it was approved on the last occasion. 
(4) The State Government or any person authorised in this behalf by that 
Government shall convey its or his approval or refusal to the scheme of 
mining within ninety days of the date of its receipt. 
(5) If approval or refusal of the scheme of mining is not conveyed to the 
holder of the lease within the stipulated period, the scheme of mining 
shall be deemed to have been provisionally approved and such approval 
shall be subject to final decision whenever communicated. 
(6) The provisions of rule 13 shall apply to the scheme of mining in the 
same way as they are applicable to the mining plan. 



(7) Every scheme of mining submitted under sub-rule (2) shall be 
prepared by a recognised person or a person employed under sub-rule 
(1) of rule 38. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
19. Mining operations to be in accordance with mining plan.— 
(1) Every holder of a lease shall carry out mining operations for granite 
in accordance with the approved mining plan with such conditions as 
may have been prescribed under sub-rule (2) of rule 16 or with such 
modifications, if any, as permitted under sub-rule (4) of rule 16 or the 
mining plan or the scheme approved under rule 12 or 17 or 18 as the 
case may be. 
(2) If the mining operations are not carried out in accordance with the 
mining plan as referred to under sub-rule (1), the State Goevrnment or 
any person authorised in this behalf by that Government may order 
suspension of all or any of the mining operations and permit 
continuance of only such operations as may be necessary to restore the 
conditions in the quarry as envisaged under the said mining plan. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
20. Prospecting and mining operations.—The prospecting and mining 
operations shall be carried out in such a manner so as to ensure 
systematic development and conservation of granite deposits and 
protection of environment. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
21. System of working.— 
(1) System of working in granite quarries in sheet rock shall be 
performed by formation of benches. 
(2) Such benches in granites and overburden including weathered 
granite shall be formed separately and the benches in overburden or 
weathered granite shall be kept sufficiently in advance so that their 
working does not interfere with the working of granite. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
22. Separate stacking of non-saleable granite.— 
(1) The non-saleable granite rejects at quarry bottom should regularly be 
collected and transported to the surface and the quarry floor kept 
reasonably clear of debris. 
(2) Small granite blocks from such non-saleable granite suitable for 
possible use in manufacture of bricks as well as flooring or wall tiles by 
small scale industries sector shall not be used as road metal or stone 



aggregate and such material shall be segregated from the dumps of 
granite rejects and stored separately for future use as far as possible, 
whenever such dumps are worked for recovery of stone aggregate or 
used as quarry backfill. 
(3) The ground selected for dumping of top soil, overburden, waste 
material or non-saleable granite shall be away from working quarry. 
(4) Before starting mining or quarrying operations, conceptual ultimate 
limits of the quarry shall be determined and dumping ground shall be so 
selected that dumping is not carried out within the limits of the ultimate 
size of the quarry except where simultaneous back filling is proposed. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
23. Notice for opening of a mine and intimation of existence of a 
mine.—The owner, agent, mining engineer or manager of every granite 
quarry shall send to the State Government or any person authorised in 
this behalf by that Government 1[***] an intimation in Form B of the 
opening of a mine so as to reach them within fifteen days of such 
opening or of the existence of a mine at the time of the commencement 
of the rules within ninety days from such commencement, as the case 
may be. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
24. Abandonment or surrender of quarries.— 
(1) The owner, agent, mining engineer, or manager of every granite 
quarry shall not abandon or surrender a granite quarry or a part of such 
quarry during the subsistence of the lease except with prior permission 
in writing of the State Government or any person authorised in this 
behalf by that Government. 
(2) Notice for abandonment or surrender of a granite quarry or a part 
thereof shall be given in Form C and shall be accompanied by plans and 
sections on a scale of not less than 1 cm=10 metres showing accurately 
the work done in such quarry upto the date of submission of the notice. 
(3) The State Government or any person authorised in this behalf by that 
Government may by an order in writing prohibit abandonment or refuse 
surrender or allow the abandonment or surrender of a granite quarry or 
part thereof with such conditions as he may specify in the order. 
(4) Where an abandonment of a granite quarry or part thereof takes 
place as a result of the occurrence of a natural calamity beyond the 
control of the owner, agent, mining engineer or manager of a such 
quarry, or the lease is terminated in compliance of any order or 



directions issued by any stautory authority established under any law for 
the time being in force or any tribunal or a court, an intimation shall be 
sent to the State Government or any person authorised in this behalf by 
that Government within a period of twenty-four hours of such 
abandonment or termination and the notice of abandonment as provided 
in sub-rule (2) shall be submitted to the State Government or any person 
in this behalf by that Government authorised within a period of fifteen 
days of such abandonment or termination. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
25. Notice of temporary discontinuance of work in quarries.—The 
owner, agent, mining engineer, or manager of every granite quarry shall 
send to the State Government or any person authorised in this behalf by 
that Government 1[***], a notice in Form D when the work in such 
quarry is discontinued for a period exceeding sixty days of as to reach 
them within seventy-five days from the date of such temporary 
discontinuance. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
26. Intimation of reopening of a quarry.—The owner, agent, mining 
engineer or manager of every granite quarry shall send to the State 
Government or any person authorised in this behalf by that Government 
1[***] an intimation in Form E of reopening of such quarry after 
temporary discontinuance so as to reach them within fifteen days from 
the date of such reopening. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
27. Copies of plans and sections to be submitted.—The owner, agent, 
mining engineer or manager of every granite quarry shall submit to the 
State Government or any person authorised in this behalf by that 
Government, a copy of the plans and sections maintained under these 
rules, as and when required by that Government or such person, as the 
case may be. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
28. Preparation of plans.— 
(1) All plans, sections and tracings or copies thereof kept at the granite 
quarry shall be serially numbered or suitably indexed. 
(2) Every plan, section or part thereof prepared under these rules shall 
carry thereon a certificate for its correctness and shall be signed by the 
mining engineer with date. 



(3) Every copy of a plan and section or part thereof submitted or 
maintained under these rules shall bear a reference to the original plan 
or section from which it was copied and shall be certified thereon by the 
owner, agent, mining engineer or manager to be a true copy of the 
original plan or section. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
29. Protection of environment.—Every holder of a prospecting licence 
or a lease shall take all possible precautions for the protection of 
environment and control of pollution while conducting prospecting, 
mining or processing of granite in the area for which such licence or 
lease is granted. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
30. Removal and utilisation of top soil.— 
(1) Where top soil exist and is to be excavated for prospecting or mining 
operations for granite, it should be removed separately. 
(2) The top soil so removed shall be utilised for restoration and 
rehabilitation of the land which is no longer required for prospecting or 
mining operations or for stabilising or landscaping the external dumps. 
(3) Where top soil cannot be used concurrently, it shall be stored 
separately for future use. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
31. Storage of overburden, waste rock, etc.— 
(1) The overburden, waste rock and non-saleable granite generated 
during prospecting or mining operations for granite shall be stored 
separately in properly formed dumps on grounds earmarked. 
(2) Such dumps shall be properly secured to prevent the escape of 
material in harmful quantities which may cause degradation of the 
surrounding land or silting of water courses. 
(3) Wherever possible, such waste rock or overburden or other rejects, 
shall be backfilled into the worked out granite quarry, where granite has 
been recovered upto the optimum depth, with a view to restore land to 
its original use or desired alternate use, as far as possible and where the 
backfilling is not feasible, the waste dumps shall be suitable terraced 
and stabilised by planting vegetation or otherwise. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
32. Reclamation and Rehabilitation of lands.—Every lease holder shall 
undertake in a phased manner restoration, reclamation and rehabilitation 
of lands affected by prospecting or mining operations and shall 



complete this work before the conclusion of such operations and the 
abandonment of the granite quarry. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
33. Precaution against air pollution.—Air pollution due to dust, exhaust 
emissions or fumes during prospecting, mining or processing operations 
for granite and related activities shall be controlled and kept within 
permissible limits specified under any environmental laws for the time 
being in force. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
34. Discharge of effluents.—Every holder of a prospecting licence or a 
lease shall take all possible precautions to prevent or reduce to a 
minimum the discharge of toxic and objectionable liquid effluents from 
granite quarry, workshop or processing plant, into surface or ground 
water bodies, and usable lands. These effluents shall conform to the 
standards laid down in this regard. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
35. Precaution against noise.—Noise arising out of prospecting, mining 
and processing operations for granite shall be abated or controlled by 
the holder of prospecting licence or a lease at the source so as to keep it 
within the permissible limit. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
36. Permissible limits and standard.—The standards and permissible 
limits of all pollutants, toxins and noise referred to in rules 33, 34 and 
35 shall be those notified by the concerned authorities under the 
provisions of the relevant statutes from time to time. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
37. Restoration of flora.—Every lease holder shall take immediate 
measures for planting in the area held under the lease or any other area 
selected by the State Government for this purpose, such number of trees 
sufficient to improve the environment and to minimise effects of land 
degradation during the entire period of such lease. He shall look after 
such tree plantations during the subsistence of the lease. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
38. Employment of mining engineer.— 
(1) For the purpose of carrying out prospecting and mining operations in 
accordance with these rules, every holder of a granite quarry lease shall 
employ,— 



(a) in the case of a mechanised granite quarry, a whole time mining 
engineer qualifications, possessing the following namely:— 
(i) Degree in mining engineering with minimum one year’s experience 
of working in mines including granite quarries, or 
(ii) Post Graduate degree in geology with First Class Metalliferous 
Mines Manager’s Certificate or Post Graduate Degree in geology with 
minimum three years’ experience of working in supervisory capacity in 
mines including granite quarries, or 
(iii) Diploma in Mining with First Class Metalliferous Mines Manager’s 
Certificate or Diploma in Mining with three year’s experience in 
supervisory capacity in mines including granite quarries, or 
(iv) First Class Metalliferous Mines Manager’s Certificate with 
minimum two years’ experience of working in mines including granite 
quarries after obtaining the certificate. 
(b) in the case of a granite quarry lease other than the mechanised 
granite quarry lease,— 
(i) a part time mining engineer possessing qualification as prescribed 
under clause (a) above; or 
(ii) a part time mining engineer, possessing a post graduate degree in 
geology or Second Class Metalliferous Mines Manager’s Certificate, or 
(iii) a whole time mining engineer possessing Secondary School 
Leaving Certificate and mine Foreman Certificate with minimum five 
years’ experience of working as Mines Foreman or Mate in mines 
including granite quarries. Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-
rule, mechanised granite quarry means a granite quarry where machine 
capable of deep drilling is deployed or heavy machinery for excavation, 
handling or lifting or transporting of overburden and granite blocks is 
deployed. 
(2) A part time mining engineer possessing qualifications prescribed in 
sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of sub-rule (1) may be employed to supervise 
upto a maximum of six granite quarries provided that all such granite 
quarries are located within a radius of fifty Kilometers: Provided that a 
person possessing the qualifications other than those prescribed in sub-
clause (i) of clause (a) of sub-rule (1) may be employed as part time 
mining engineer in quarries upto a maximum of three granite quarries 
provided that such quarries are located within a radius of fifty 
kilometers. 
The Granit  and Development Rules, 1999  



39. Duties of mining engineer.— 
(1) It shall be the duty of the mining engineer to take all necessary steps 
to plan and conduct mining operations, so as to ensure conservation of 
granite, systematic development of the granite deposits and protection of 
environment in and around the granite quarry lease area in accordance 
with these rules. 
(2) He shall be responsible for the preparation and maintenance of plans, 
sections, reports and schemes in accordance with these rules. 
(3) He shall carry out all such orders and directions as may be given in 
writing under these rules by the State Government or any person 
authorised in this behalf by that Government and shall forward a copy of 
each of such orders or directions to the holder of prospecting licence or, 
as the case may be, the granite quarry lease. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
40. Supply of materials, appliances and facilities.— 
(1) The mining engineer shall ensure that there is sufficient provision of 
proper materials, appliances and facilities at all times at granite quarry 
for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of these rules and orders 
issued thereunder and where he is not the owner or agent of the granite 
quarry, he shall make requisition in writing to the owner or agent for 
anything required for the aforesaid purpose. A copy of every such 
requisition shall be recorded in bound paged book kept of the purpose. 
(2) On receipt of a requisition under sub-rule (1), the owner or agent 
shall provide as soon as possible the materials and facilities 
requisitioned by the mining engineer. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
1[41. Half yearly and annual returns.— 
(1) The owner, agent, mining engineer or manager of every granite 
quarry shall submit to the State Government or any person authorized in 
this behalf by that Government returns in respect of such granite quarry 
within the time specified in respect of such returns, namely:— 
(a) a half yearly return in Form F for every half year ending 30th 
September and 31st March before the 15th of the following month for 
the preceding half yearly period; 
(b) an annual return in Form G which shall be submitted before the 1st 
July of each year for the preceding year: Provided that in case of 
abandonment or surrender of a granite quarry, such annual return shall 



be submitted within ninety days of the date of abandonment or 
surrender. 
(2) The State Government or any person authorized in this behalf by that 
Government shall forward a copy, each of the half yearly return in Form 
F and annual return in Form G received under clauses (a) and (b) of sub-
rule (1), to the Controller General, Indian Bureau of Mines, within thirty 
days from the date of such receipt.] 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
42. Notice of certain appointments.—When any new appointment is 
made of an agent, mining engineer, geologist and manager for the 
purpose of these rules or when the employment of any such person is 
terminated or any such person leaves the said employment or when any 
change occurs in the address of any such person, the owner of the 
granite quarry or the holder of the prospecting licence, relating to such 
appointment, termination, living or change in address shall, within 
fifteen days from the date of such appointment, termination, leaving or 
change in address, give a notice in Form H to the State Government or 
any person authorised in this behalf by that Government. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
43. Records of boreholes.—The owner, agent, mining engineer, 
geologist or manager of every granite quarry or the holder of a 
prospecting licence shall keep a record of all boreholes in Form I and 
shall retain all records and samples of the strata passed through. He shall 
not destroy such records of boreholes and samples of strata except with 
the prior approval of the State Government or any person so authorised 
on this behalf. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
44. Transfer of records of transferees.—When the ownership of a 
prospecting licence or a granite quarry lease is transferred, the previous 
owner or his agent shall make over to the new owner or his agent within 
a period of seven days of the transfer of the ownership, borehole cores 
preserved if any, all plans, sections, reports, registers and other records 
maintained in pursuance of the Act, rules or orders made thereunder, 
and all correspondence relevant thereto relating to the prospecting 
licence or granite quarry lease; and when the requirements of these rules 
have been duly complied with, both previous and the new owners of 
their respective agents shall forthwith send to the State Government or 
any person authorised in this behalf by that Government a detailed list 



of borehole cores, plans, sections, reports, registers and other records 
that have been transferred. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
45. Copies of notices and returns to be maintained.—The owner, agent, 
mining engineer or manager of every granite quarry or a holder of a 
prospecting licence shall maintain the labour attendance register, 
production and despatch register, explosives consumption register, test 
reports and details of mining machinery and copies of all notices and 
returns, plans, sections and schemes submitted to the State Government 
or any person authorised in this behalf by that Government under these 
rules, at an office established by the license or lessee and these shall be 
made available at an reasonable times to the State Government or any 
person authorised in this behalf by that Government for inspection. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
46. Revision.— 
(1) Any person aggrieved by any order made or direction issued by any 
person authorised by the State Government to make or issue such order 
or direction under these rules may within ninety days of the 
communication of such order apply to the State Government for revision 
of the said order:— Provided that any such application may be 
entertained after the said period of ninety days if the applicant satisfies 
the State Government that he had sufficient cause for not making the 
application within time. 
(2) Every order, against which a revision application is preferred under 
sub-rule (1), shall be complied with pending the decision of the State 
Government in such revision: Provided that the State Government may 
on an application by the applicant, suspend the operation of the order 
appealed against pending disposal of the revision application. 
(3) On receipt of an application for revision under sub-rule (1), the State 
Government after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the 
aggrieved person, may confirm, modify or set aside the order or 
direction. 
(4) Every application submitted under the provisions of this rule shall be 
accompanied by a Treasury Receipt showing that a fee of five hundred 
rupees has been paid into a State Government Treasury or any branch of 
the State Bank of India doing Treasury Business to the credit of the 
State Government. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  



47. Penalty.—Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of these rules 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
one year, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or with 
both and in the case of continuing contravention with an additional fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees for every day during which 
such contravention continues after conviction for the first such 
contravention. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
48. Facilities for undertaking research or training.—Every holder of a 
prospecting licence or a lease shall afford all reasonable facilities to 
persons authorised by the Central Government or the State Government 
for the purpose of undertaking research or training in matters relating to 
mining or geology. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
49. Territorial jurisdiction.—The territorial jurisdiction of a person 
authorised by the Central Government or the State Government for the 
purpose of these rules shall be as notified by the Central Government or 
the State Government, as the case may be, in the Official Gazette from 
time to time. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
50. Obligation to supply other information.—The owner, agent, mining 
engineer, geologist or manager of every granite quarry shall furnish 
such information regarding such quarry or any matter connected 
therewith as the Central Government or the State Government or any 
person authorised in this behalf by the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be, may require by an order in writing and 
the information shall be furnished within such time as may be specified 
in the aforesaid order. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
51. Provisions of these rules to be applicable to Government.—The 
Government or its agencies carrying out mining operations without a 
lease shall be bound by all the provisions of these rules in the same 
manner as they are applicable to holders of granite quarry leases. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
52. Applicability of the provisions of Minor Mineral Concession Rules 
framed by the State Government.—The provisions of the Minor Mineral 
Concession Rules or any other rules framed by the State Government 



under section 15 of the Act shall be applicable to granite quarry leases 
to the extent they are not repugnant to or inconsistent with these rules. 
The Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999  
53. Delegation of powers.—The State Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by it under 
these rules may, in relation to such matters and subject to such 
conditions, if any, be exercisable also by such officer or authority 
subordinate to the State Government as may be specified in the 
notification. 
 


