




































 

Government of  India 

Ministry of Mines  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 MINERAL CONCESSION RULES, 1960 
 

(As amended up to 26
th

 July, 2012) 
              

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

Issued  by 
 

 

CONTROLLER  GENERAL,  

 INDIAN BUREAU OF MINES,  

NAGPUR 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

October, 2012 
 

 

 

Price: (Inland) Rs. 195.00; (Foreign) £ 2.53 or $ 4.24 

 

  

_____________________________ 
Printed at IBM Press, 15/500/August, 2005 

 
 



CONTENTS 
 

Rule                                                                                                                       Page No. 

 

CHAPTER   I - Preliminary 

 

1. Short title           1                                                                                                                  

2. Definitions            1                                                                                                         

3.    Saving of Act 33 of 1962            1                                                                                  

 

 CHAPTER   II – Grant of Reconnaissance Permit 

 

4. Application for reconnaissance permit          2                                                            

4A. Acknowledgement of application          3 

5.     Refusal of application for a reconnaissance permit        3                                         

6.         Status of grant on death of the applicant        3                                                           

            for reconnaissance permit   

7.         Conditions of a reconnaissance permit         3                                                             

7A.      Reconnaissance permit  to be executed within three months      5                             

7B.       Security deposit        6                                                                                                

7C.       Prospecting Licences and Mining Leases of other minerals       6                            

7D.       Registers          6                                                                                                          

  

CHAPTER   III – Grant of Prospecting Licences in Respect of Land  

                               in which the Minerals Vest  in the Government 

 

8.       Applicability of Chapter II, Chapter III & Chapter IV     7 
9.       Application for prospecting licence and its renewal        7                                        
10.       Acknowledgement of application           9                                                                    
10A.     (Omitted.)             9                                                                                                   

11.       Disposal of application for grant and renewal of prospecting licence     9               
12.       Refusal of application for a prospecting licence      10                                            
13.       (Omitted)                      10                                                                                                 
13A.     Status of grant on death of the applicant for prospecting licence   11                    

14.       Conditions of a prospecting licence           11                                                            
15.       Licence to be executed within three months                                                 14 
15A.  Transfer of licence to be executed within three months   14        

16.       Report of information obtained by the licensee                                           14       
17.       (Omitted.)                                                                                           15        
18.       Maintenance of accounts                                                                       15            
19.       Inspection                                                                                                 15          
20.       Security deposit                                                                                          15        
21.       Registers                          15                                                               

   

CHAPTER   IV – Grant of Mining Leases in Respect of Land  

                                           in which the Minerals Vest  in the Government 

 

22.      Applications for grant of mining leases                                              16 
22A.    Mining operations to be in accordance with mining plans                           21 



 

 

ii  

 

22B.     Mining plan to be prepared  by recognised persons                                       21 

22BB.  Procedure for approval of mining plans     22                                                    

22C.    Grant of recognition by Central Government      23 

22D.   Minimum size of the mining lease    24                                             

23.      Acknowledgement of application      24                                                                
23A.    (Omitted.)    24                                                                                                     

24.      Disposal of application for mining lease     24                                              
24A.    Renewal of mining lease     25                                                                             

24B.    Renewal of a mining lease in favour of  a person using    26 

            the mineral in his own industry 

25.      (Omitted.)      26                                                                                                    
25A.    Status of the grant on the death of applicant for mining lease   27                          

26.      Refusal of application for grant and renewal of mining lease   27                        
27.      Conditions     27                                                                                                      
28.      Lapsing of leases                                                                        32                        
28A.    Submission of an application to the State Govt. explaining the    34                   

            reasons for non-commencement or discontinuance of mining operations                 

29.      Restriction on determination of lease       34 
29A.    Provision for closure    36                                                    

30.      Rights of lessee       36                                                                                                 
31.      Lease to be executed within six months         36                                                        
32.      Security deposit      37                                                                                              
33.      Survey of the area leased     37                                                                                  
34.      Manner of exercise of preferential rights for mining lease    37                                
35.      Preferential rights of certain persons     37                                                              
36.      Boundaries below the surface     37                                                                            
37.      Transfer of lease    37                                                                                                
37A.    Transfer of lease to be executed within three months    39                                      

38.      Amalgamation of leases       39                                                                                  
39.      Pending applications for transfer and amalgamation     39                                          
40.      Registers       39                                                                                                          
 

CHAPTER   V – Procedure for Obtaining a Prospecting Licence or  Mining 

                             Lease in Respect of Land in which the Minerals Vest  in a 

                             Person Other  than the Government 
 

 

41.       Applicability of this chapter        40                                   

42. Restrictions on the grant of prospecting licence and mining lease   40                     

43.       Renewal of prospecting licence  ( Omitted.)      40                                            
44.       Conditions of prospecting licence       40                                                                    
45.       Conditions of mining lease      41                                                                                
46.       Transfer or assignment      42                                                                                      
47.       Submission of copy of licence or lease       42                                                            

48.       Communication of transfer or assignment       42                                                        
49.       Prohibition of premium        42                                                                                   
50.       Prohibition of working of mines     42                                                                        
51.       Returns and statements           42                                                                               
52.       Penalty         42                                                                                                           



 

 

iii  

 

 

CHAPTER   VI – Grant of  Prospecting Licences and  Mining Leases 

                               in Respect of Land in which the Minerals Vest  Partly in  

                               the Government and Partly in Private Persons 

 

53.      Chapters III and IV to apply to prospecting licences and mining leases   44  
 in respect of minerals which vest partly in Government and partly  

            in private persons 

  

CHAPTER   VII –  Revision 

 

54.     Application for revision           45                                                                                    
55.     Orders on revision application          45                                                                          

 

CHAPTER   VIII – Miscellaneous 

 

56. Power to rectify apparent mistakes         47                                                                   

57. Copies of licences and leases and annual returns to be       47                                   

 supplied to Government 

58. Reservation of areas for exploitation in the public sector, etc. (Omitted.)  47        

59. Availability of area for regrant to be notified      47                                                    
60. Premature applications            48                                                                                   
61. Lessor to supply certain information to the lessee       49                                           
62. Change of name, nationality, etc. to be intimated         49                                         
63. Previous approval of the Central Govt. to be obtained through State Govt.  49   
63A Time limit to State Government to dispose of application for   49 

            reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence and mining lease       

64. How the fees and deposit to be made        50                                                               
64A. Charging of interests on rent, royalty, fee or other sum      50 

64B.     Charging of Royalty in case of minerals subjected to processing                 50 

64C.     Royalty on tailings or rejects                                                                         50 

64D.     Guidelines for computing royalty on minerals on ad valorem basis             51                                    

65. Facilities for training of students         53                                                                      
66. Geophysical data to be supplied to the Geological Survey of India    53                  

and the Department of Atomic Energy 

66A. Prospecting/mining operations for atomic minerals in the area    54                         

             already held by licensee/lessee 

67. Lease period            55                                                                                                     
68. Repeal            55                                                                                                               
 

CHAPTER  - IX 

 

69. Associated minerals          56                                                                                          
70. Sand not  be treated as minor mineral when used for certain purposes  57          
71. ( Omitted.)          57                                                                                                         

 

 

 

 



 

 

iv  

 

CHAPTER  - X 

 

72. Payment of compensation to owner of surface rights, etc.     58 
73. Assessment of compensation for damage      58  
74. Issue of notification where prospecting operations are to      58                                 

be undertaken by the Geological Survey of India, etc. 

75. Prospecting or mining operation by State Government     59                                   

 

 

SCHEDULE  I  

 

Index           60                                                                                                       

 Form A Application for Reconnaissance Permit      61                                   

 Form B Application for Prospecting Licence        64                                      

 Form D Receipt of applications for Prospecting Licence/     67                     

   Mining Lease or renewals 

 Form D-1 Receipt of application for Reconnaissance Permit    68                    

 Form E Application for renewal of Prospecting Licence   69                        

 Form F  Prospecting Licence Deed        71                                                        

 Form F-1 Reconnaissance Permit Deed       85                                                    

 Form G Register of applications for Prospecting Licences  96      

 Form G-1 Register of applications for Reconnaissance Permits   97              

 Form H Register of Prospecting Licences           98                                          

 Form H-1 Register of Reconnaissance Permits       99                                      

      Form I             Application for Mining Lease                            100                                  

 Form J  Application for renewal of Mining Lease               105                                 

 Form K Mining Lease Deed                   108                                                  

 Form L Register of application for Mining Lease               130                                 

 Form M Register of Mining Leases                131                                                  

 Form N Application for revision                 132                                                      

 Form O Model form for transfer of Mining Lease            134 

            Form P   Model form for transfer of Prospecting Licences           138 

                                

 

SCHEDULE  II -  Application fee for prospecting licences              142                                 

 

SCHEDULE  III - Maximum quantities of ore and minerals removable           142                

 

SCHEDULE  IV - Omitted.                   143                                                                              

 

SCHEDULE  V - Institutions/Banks/Corporations                  143                                             

 

 

………………… 

 

 

 

 

 



 1 

MINERAL CONCESSION RULES, 1960 

 
 G.S.R. 1398, dated the 11th November, 1960  - In exercise of the powers 
conferred by section 13 of the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) 

Act, 1957 (67 of 1957), the Central Government hereby makes the following 

rules, namely :-  

CHAPTER  I 
Preliminary 

 

1. Short title :- These rules may be called the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960.  
 

2.   Definitions :-  In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires, -  

 

(i)  “Act” means the Mines and Minerals 1[(Development and Regulation )]  
    Act,1957 ( 67 of 1957); 

 

(ii) “Form” means a form set out in Schedule I to these rules; 
 
2
[(iia) “illegal mining” means any reconnaissance or prospecting or mining 

operation undertaken by any person or a company in any area without 

holding a reconnaissance permit or a prospecting licence or as the case may 

be, a mining lease as required under sub-section(1) of section 4 of the Act.  

 

Explanation – For the purpose of this clause, - 

(a) Violation of any rules, other than the rules made under section 23C of the 
Act, within the mining lease area by a holder of a mining lease shall not 

include illegal mining. 

(b) Any area granted under a reconnaissance permit or a prospecting licence or a 
mining lease, as the case may be shall be considered as an area held with 

lawful authority by the holder of such permit of licence or a lease, while 

determining the extension of illegal mining.] 

 

(iii) “railway” and “railway administration” have the meanings respectively  
      assigned to them in the Indian Railways Act, 1890 (9 of 1890); 

 

(iv) “Schedule” means a Schedule appended to these rules;  
 

(v) “section” means a section of the Act.  
 

3.  Saving  of  Act 33 of  1962 :–  Nothing  in  these  rules shall affect the 

provisions of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 ( 33 of 1962) 
3
[and  the rules made 

thereunder in respect of licensing relating to atomic minerals  listed in Part B  of 

the First Schedule  to the Act.]   
 

1 Substituted by G.S.R.56 (E) , dated 17.1.2000. 2 Inserted by G.S.R.593(E), dated 26.7.2012 

3 Inserted by G.S.R.56 (E) , dated 17.1.2000 



 2 

1
[ CHAPTER II 

Grant of Reconnaissance Permits 

 
4. Application for reconnaissance permit :– (1) An application for 

reconnaissance permit shall be made to the State Government in Form `A’ 

through such officer  or authority as the State Government may specify in this 

behalf. 

 

(2) (a) Every such application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable  

      fee calculated at the rate of five rupees per square kilometre. 

 

(b) A valid clearance certificate, in the form prescribed by the   State 

Government for payment of mining dues, such as royalty or dead rent 

or surface rent payable under the Act or rules made thereunder, from 

that Government or any officer or authority authorised by that 

Government in this behalf :  

 

Provided that where a person has furnished an affidavit to the satisfaction 

of the State Government stating that he does not hold and has not held a 

reconnaissance permit, it shall not be necessary for him to produce the said  valid 

clearance  certificate : 

 

Provided  that an affidavit stating that no dues are outstanding shall suffice 

subject to the condition that the certificate required as above shall be furnished  

within ninety days of the date of application and the application shall become 

invalid if the party fails to file the certificate within the said  ninety days : 

 

Provided also that where any injunction has been issued by a court of law 

or any other competent authority staying the recovery of any such mining dues or 

income tax, non- payment thereof shall not be treated as a disqualification for the 

purpose of granting the reconnaissance permit : 

 

Provided further that in case the applicant is a partnership firm or a private 

limited company, such certificate shall be furnished by all persons of the 

partnership firm or, as the case may be, all members of the private limited 

company. 

 

     (c) An affidavit stating that the applicant has - 

 

(i) filed up-to-date income- tax returns; 

(ii)  paid the income- tax assessed on him; and 

(iii) paid the income tax on the basis of his assessment as 
provided in the Income Tax Act, 1961(43 of 1961). 

 
1 Substituted by G.S.R.56 (E) , dated 17.1.2000.  



 3 

(d) An affidavit showing the particulars of areas,  mineral-wise  in the   

State, which the applicant or any person jointly with him - 

 

(i) already holds under a reconnaissance permit; 

(ii)  has applied for but not granted; and 

(iii)  being applied for simultaneously. 

 

4A.  Acknowledgement of application :– (1) Where an application for 

the grant of  reconnaissance permit is delivered personally, its receipt shall be 

acknowledged forthwith. 

(2) Where such application is received by registered post, its receipt shall 

be acknowledged on the same day. 

 

(3) In any other case, the receipt of such application shall be 

acknowledged within three days of the receipt. 

 

(4) The receipt of every such application shall be acknowledged in Form 

‘D-1’. 

 

5. Refusal of application for a reconnaissance permit :-  (1) The State 

Government may after giving an opportunity of being heard and for reasons to be 

recorded in writing and communicated to the applicant, refuse to grant a 

reconnaissance permit over the whole or part of the area applied for. 

 

(2) Where it appears that the application is not complete in all material 

particulars or is not accompanied by the required documents, the State 

Government shall, by notice, require the applicant to supply the omission or, as 

the case may be, furnish the documents without delay and in any case not later 

than thirty days from the date of receipt of the said notice by the applicant. 

 

6. Status of grant on death of the applicant for reconnaissance permit:   

(1) Where an applicant for the grant of reconnaissance permit dies before 

the order granting him a reconnaissance permit is passed , the application for the 

grant of reconnaissance permit shall be deemed to have been made by his legal 

representatives. 

 

(2) In the case of an applicant in respect of whom an order granting a 

reconnaissance permit is passed but who dies before the deed referred in sub- rule 

(1) of rule 7A is executed, the order shall be deemed to have been passed in the 

name of the legal representative of the deceased. 

 

7. Conditions of a reconnaissance permit :-  (1) Every reconnaissance 

permit granted under these rules, shall, in addition to any other conditions that 

may be specified therein be subject to the following conditions namely, 

 



 4 

(i) The holder of reconnaissance permit shall  progressively 

relinquish the area granted under the permit as follows : - 

 

(a) After completion of two years, the area shall be reduced 
to one thousand square kilometers or fifty percent of the 

area granted, whichever is less; and 

 

(b) The  area  would  be  further  relinquished  so  that  the    
      permit holder is left with an area not more than  twenty 

      five square kilometres at the end of third year.  

 

(ii) The holder of the reconnaissance permit shall strictly adhere to 

the minimum expenditure commitment and specific physical 

targets specified in the order of grant of the permit failing which 

reconnaissance permit may be cancelled. 

 

(iii) The holder of reconnaissance permit shall make available all 

data collected by him during the reconnaissance operations to the 

Geological Survey of India, Indian Bureau of Mines and the State 

Government  which may be made available to any prospecting 

investor after a minimum period of two years of the completion of 

the period of  reconnaissance permit. 

 

(iv) The holder of reconnaissance permit shall not enter any forest 

land or any private land without obtaining permission of the Forest 

Department or the owner of  the private land, as the case may be. 

 

(v) The holder of reconnaissance permit shall maintain accurate 

faithful account of all the expenses incurred by him on the 

reconnaissance operations. 

 

(vi) The holder of reconnaissance permit shall submit to the State 

Government a six monthly report  of the work done by him and the 

valuable data collected  by him during the period.  The report shall 

be submitted within 3 months of the close of the period to which it 

relates. 

 

(vii) The permit holder shall also submit to the State Government 

within three months of the expiry of the permit, or abandonment of 

the operations or termination of the permit whichever is  earlier, a 

full report of the work done by him and all information relevant to 

mineral resources acquired  by him in the course of reconnaissance 

permit in the area covered by the permit. 

 

(viii) While submitting reports under sub clause (vi) or (vii), the 

permit holder may specify that the whole or any part of the report 



 5 

or data submitted by him shall be kept confidential; and the State 

Government shall thereupon, keep the specified portions as 

confidential  for a period of two years from the expiry  of the 

permit, or abandonment of operations or termination of the permit, 

whichever is earlier. 

 

(ix) The permit holder shall allow every officer authorised by the 

Central Government or the State Government in this behalf to 

examine at any time accounts maintained and furnish the Central 

Government or the State Government or any other officer 

authorised by it in that behalf such information and returns. 

 

(x) The permit holder shall allow any officer authorised by the 

Central Government or the State Government in this behalf to 

inspect any reconnaissance operations carried on by him.   

 

(xi) The permit holder shall pay such permit fee as may be fixed by 

the State Government, being not less than five rupees per square 

kilometre and not more than twenty rupees per square kilometre of 

land held by the permit holder for each year or part thereof. 

 

(2) The reconnaissance permit may contain such other  conditions  as  may 

be imposed by the Central Government which inter-alia may include the condition 

that the representative of the Directorate General, Civil Aviation or Ministry of 

Defence shall be present during the aerial surveys. 

 

(3) The  State  Government   may,  with   the   approval   of   the   Central  

Government, impose such further conditions in the permit as it may think 

necessary in the interest of mineral development and for compliance  of various 

legal provisions. 

 

(4) In case of breach of any  condition imposed on any holder of 

reconnaissance permit by or under this rule, the State Government may by order 

in writing, cancel the permit, and/or forfeit in whole or in part, the amount 

deposited by the permit holder as security : 

 

Provided that no such order shall be made without giving the permit 

holder a reasonable opportunity of stating his case. 

 

7A. Reconnaissance Permit to be executed within three months :-  

(1) Where on any application  for a reconnaissance permit an order has 

been made for the grant of such permit, a deed granting such permit shall be 

executed within ninety days of the date of the communication of the order or such 

further period as the State government may allow in this behalf, and if no such 

deed is executed within such period due to any fault on the part of the applicant, 



 6 

the State Government may revoke the order granting the reconnaissance permit 

and in that event the fee paid shall be forfeited to the State Government. 

 

(2) The deed referred to in sub rule 1 shall be in Form F-1, or in a    Form 

as near thereto as circumstances of each case may require.  

 

(3) The date of the commencement of the period for which a 

reconnaissance permit is granted shall be the date on which the deed is executed 

after all  necessary clearances have been obtained. 

 

7B. Security deposit :– (i) An applicant for a reconnaissance permit shall, 

before deed referred to in sub-rule (1) of rule 7A is executed, deposit as security 

for the observance of the terms and conditions of the permit a sum of twenty 

rupees in respect of every square kilometre or part thereof for which the permit is 

granted. 

 

(ii) Any deposit made under sub-clause (i) above if not forfeited under the 

rules shall be refunded to the applicant as soon as the report  referred to in sub-

rule (1) (vii) of rule 7 is submitted. 

 

7C. Prospecting Licences and Mining Leases of other minerals :- The 

applications received for grant of prospecting licences or mining leases within the 

area granted under reconnaissance permit for minerals other than those for which 

the permit has been granted, shall not be refused on the grounds that the area is 

not available for grant.   The State Government shall  dispose of such applications 

as per provisions of these rules : 

 

Provided that if a prospecting licence or a mining lease for other mineral has 

been granted to some other applicant within the area granted for a reconnaissance 

permit and where the reconnaissance permit holder discovers availability of 

minerals covered under his permit within the area so granted subsequently for 

prospecting or mining of minerals other than those covered under the 

reconnaissance permit, he shall have the right to get such areas vacated from the 

licensee or the lessee, as the case may be and such licensee or lessee shall not 

hinder the reconnaissance operations being undertaken by the reconnaissance 

permit holder.  

 

7D. Registers  : - (1)  A register of applications for reconnaissance 

permits shall be maintained  by the State Government in Form G –1. 

 

(2) A register of reconnaissance permit shall be maintained by State 

Government in Form H –1.] 



 7 

CHAPTER  III 
Grant of prospecting licences in respect of land in which 

the minerals vest in the Government 

 
1
[8. Applicability of Chapter II, Chapter III and Chapter IV :– The 

provisions of Chapter II, Chapter III and Chapter IV shall apply to the grant of 

reconnaissance permits as well as grant and renewal of prospecting  licences and 

mining leases only in respect of the land in which the minerals vest in the  

Government of a State.] 

 

9. Application for prospecting  licence and its renewal :- (1) An 

application for a prospecting licence and its renewal in respect of land in which 

the minerals vest in Government shall be made to the State Government in Form 

B and Form E respectively through such officer or authority as the State 

Government may specify in this behalf. 
 

(2) Every such application shall be accompanied by- 

  
 (a) a 2[non-refundable]  fee calculated in accordance with the  

provisions of Schedule II; and 

 

(b)  (Omitted) 

 (c)  (Omitted) 
 

 (d) a  valid clearance  certificate  in  the form  prescribed  by  the  State   
 Government, of payment of mining dues, such as royalty or dead 

rent and surface rent payable under the Act or the rules made 

thereunder, from that Government or any officer or authority by 

that Government in this behalf; 

 

Provided 
3
[omitted] that in case the applicant is a partnership firm 

or a private limited company such certificate shall be furnished by 

all partners of the partnership firm or, as the case may be, all 

members of the private limited company : 

 
4
[Provided further that where any injunction has been issued by 

court of law or any other competent authority staying the recovery 

of any such mining dues or income tax, non-payment thereof shall 

not be treated as a disqualification for the purpose of granting or 

renewing the said prospecting licence: 

 

Provided that where a person has furnished an affidavit to the 

satisfaction  of  the  State  Government  stating  that  he  does  not   

hold  and  has  not  held  a  prospecting  licence,  it  shall  not  be 

 
1. Substituted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000.      3. Omitted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000. 

2. Inserted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000.           4. Inserted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000. 



 8 

necessary for him to produce the said valid clearance certificate : 

 

Provided further that a sworn affidavit stating that no dues are 

outstanding shall suffice subject to the condition that the certificate 

required as above shall become invalid if the  party fails to file the  

certificate within the said ninety days.] 

 

      (e) an affidavit stating that the applicant has - 

 

(i) filed up-to-date income tax return; 
(ii) paid the income tax assessed on him ; and 
(iii) paid the income tax on the basis of self-assessment  

as provided in the Income Tax Act,1961; 
 

(f) an affidavit showing particulars of areas mineral-wise in
1
[the] 

state, which the applicant or any person jointly with him - 

 

(i) already holds under a prospecting licence; 
(ii) has applied for but not granted; and 
(iii) being applied for simultaneously.  

 

(g)  a statement in writing that the applicant, where the land is not 

owned by him, has obtained surface rights over the area or has 

obtained the consent of the owner for starting prospecting  

operations : 

 

Provided that no such statement shall be necessary were the land is 

owned by the Government.  

 

Provided 
2
[omitted] that the consent of the owner for starting 

prospecting operations in the area or part thereof may be furnished 

after execution of the prospecting licence but before entry into the 

said area. 

 
3
[Provided further that no further consent would be required in the 

case of renewal where consent has already been obtained during 

grant of the licence.] 
 

4
[omitted] 

5
[omitted] 

6
[omitted] 

 

1 Substituted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000.        4 Omitted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000 

2 Omitted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000.             5.Ibid. 

3 Inserted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000.             6.Ibid.  

 



 9 

(3) The State Government may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, relax 

the provisions of clause (d) of sub-rule (2) of rule 9. 

 

(4) The grant of a clearance certificate under clause (d) of sub-rule (2) of 

rule 9 shall not discharge the holder of such certificate from the liability to pay the 

mining dues which may subsequently be found to be payable by him under the 

Act or the rules made thereunder.   

 

  10. Acknowledgement of application :- (1) where an application for the 

grant of renewal of a prosecuting licence is delivered personally, its receipt shall 

be acknowledged forthwith. 

 

(2) Where such application is received by registered post, its receipt shall 

be acknowledged on the same day. 
 

(3) In any other case, the receipt of such application shall be 

acknowledged within three days of the receipt . 

 

(4) The   receipt   of   every   such   application   shall  be acknowledged in  

Form D. 

 

10A. (Omitted) 

 

11. Disposal of application for the grant and renewal of prospecting 

licence :-  (1) (Omitted) 

 

(2) (a) An application for the renewal of a prospecting licence shall  be   

made at least ninety days before the expiry of the prospecting licence  

and shall be accompanied by – 

 

(i) a statement relating to the prospecting operations already 

undertaken by the applicant; 

 

(ii) the amount of expenditure incurred; 

 

(iii) the numbers of hours and days for which the work was 

undertaken; and 

 

(iv) the period which is required to complete the prospecting 

work. 

  

(b) An application for the renewal for a prospecting licence shall be 

disposed of by the State Government before the expiry of the  period of 

prospecting licence and if the application is not disposed of within that 

period, the licence shall be deemed to have been renewed for a period 

not exceeding the period prescribed for renewal of prospecting licence 



 10 

under sub-section (2) of section 7 of the  Act, or the period for which an 

application is made, whichever is less. 

 

(3) The State Government may, for reasons to be recorded in writing  and 

communicated to the applicant , at the time of renewal, reduce the area applied 

for. 
 

1
[(4) The State Government may condone delay in submission of an 

application for renewal of a prospecting licence made after the  time limit 

prescribed in sub-rule (2) provided the application for the renewal has been made 

before the expiry of the licence.] 

 

12. Refusal of application for a prospecting licence : - (1) The State 

Government may, after giving an opportunity of being  heard and for reasons to 

be recorded in writing and communicated to the applicant, refuse to grant or 

renew a prospecting licence over the whole or part of the area applied for. 

 

(1A) An application for the grant or renewal of a prospecting licence made 

under rule 9 shall not be refused by the State Government only on the ground that 

Form B or Form E, as the case may be, is not complete in all material particulars, 

or is not accompanied by the documents referred to in clauses (d), (e), (f) and (g) 

of sub-rule (2) of the said rule. 
 

(1B) Where it appears that the application is not complete in all material 

particulars or is not accompanied by the required documents, the State 

Government shall, by notice, require the applicant to supply the omission or, as 

the case may be, furnish the documents without delay and in any case not later 

than thirty days from the date of receipt of the said notice by the applicant. 

 

(2) An application for the grant of a prospecting licence shall not be 

refused on the ground only that, in the opinion of the State Government, a mining 

lease should be granted for the area for which the application for a prospecting 

licence has been made: 

 

Provided that where applications for the grant of prospecting licence and 

applications for the grant of mining lease in respect of the same area are received 

on the same date or on different dates within a period of thirty days, the 

applications for the grant of mining lease shall, if the area was previously held 

and worked under a mining lease, be disposed of before the applications for the 

grant of prospecting licence are considered. 

 
2
[Provided further that the applications received for grant of prospecting 

licence shall be liable to be considered only if they have not been already 

disposed of.] 
13. 

3
[Omitted.] 

________________________________________________________________ 
1. Inserted by G.S.R. 56(E), dated 17.1.2000. 2. Ibid. 3.Omitted by G.S.R. 56(E), dated 17.1.2000. 



 11 

 

 

13A. Status of grant on death of the applicant for prospecting licence :  

 

(1) Where an applicant for the grant of a prospecting licence dies before 

the order granting him a prospecting licence is passed, the application for the 

grant of a prospecting licence shall be deemed to have been made by his legal 

representative. 
. 

(2) In the case of an applicant in respect of whom an order granting a 

prospecting licence is passed but who dies before the deed referred to in sub-rule 

(1) of rule 15 is executed, the order shall be deemed to have been passed in the 

name of the legal representative of the deceased. 

 

14. Conditions of a prospecting licence :- (1) Every prospecting licence 

granted under these rules, shall, in addition to any other conditions that may be 

specified therein, be subject to the following conditions, namely :- 

 

(i) the licensee shall pay such  prospecting fee as may be fixed by  the  
State Government, 

1
[being not less than rupee one and not more 

than  rupees ten] per hectare of land covered by the licence for 

each year or part of a year of the period for which the licence is 

granted or renewed; 

 

(ii) the licensee may win and carry for purposes other than commercial 

purposes - 

 

(a) any quantity of such minerals within the limits specified under 
column 3 of  Schedule III without any payment; 

 

(b) any quantity of such minerals not exceeding the limits specified 
under column 4 of Schedule III, on payment of royalty for the time 

being specified in the Second Schedule to the Act in respect to 

those minerals : 

 

Provided that if any quantity in excess of the quantities specified in sub-

clause (b) is won and carried away, the State Government may recover the cost of 

the excess quantity of minerals won and carried away.  

 

 (iii) with the written approval of the State Government, the licensee 

may carry away quantities of minerals in excess of the limits 

specified in Schedule III, on payment of royalty for the time being 

specified in the Second Schedule to the Act, for chemical, 

metallurgical, ore-dressing and other test purposes. 

__________________________________________________________________ 
1 Substituted by G.S.R. 21 (E), dated 11.1.2002. 

 



 12 

(iv) save in the case of land in respect of which the licensee is granted a 

mining lease, he shall, within six months next after the 

determination of the licence or the date of abandonment of the 

prospecting operations, whichever is earlier, securely plug all bores 

and fill up or fence all excavations in the land covered by the 

licence;  

 

(v) the licensee shall report to the State Government the discovery of 

any mineral not specified in the licence within a period of sixty 

days from the date of such discovery. Consequent upon such 

reporting, such newly discovered mineral shall be deemed to have 

been included in the prospecting licence; 

 

(vi) (Omitted.) 

 

(vii) the licensee shall not except with the previous sanction of the State 

Government transfer his licence; 

  
1
[ 

2
[Provided that no prospecting licence shall be transferred to any person 

who has not filed an affidavit stating that he has filed an up-to-date income-tax 

returns and paid the income-tax assessed on him and paid the income tax on the 

basis of self-assessment as provided in the Income Tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) 

and except on payment to the State Government of a fee of five hundred rupees : 

 

Provided further that the State Government shall not grant its sanction for 

the transfer of prospecting licence unless the transferee has accepted all the 

conditions and liabilities which the transferor has in respect of such prospecting 

licence : 

 

Provided also that the State Government may, by order in writing after 

providing the licensee the opportunity of being heard, cancel such prospecting 

licence at any time if the licensee has, in the opinion of the State Government, 

committed a breach of this clause or rule 15A.]] 

 

(viii) the licensee shall not pay a wage less than the minimum wage 

prescribed by the Central or the State Government from time to 

time under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948; 

 

(ix) the licensee shall observe the provisions of the Mines Act, 1952 
3
[(35 of 1952)  and the provisions of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 

(33 of 1962 ) insofar as the latter relate to atomic minerals included 

in Part ‘B’ of the First Schedule to the Act.] 

 
1. Inserted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000. 

2. Substituted by G.S.R. 31 (E), dated 22.1.2001. 

3. Inserted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000. 

 



 13 

(x)  the licensee shall - 

 

(a) take immediate measures for the planting in the same area or any 

other area selected by the Central or the State Government not less 

than twice the number of trees destroyed by reasons of any prospecting 

operations; 

 

(b) look after them during subsistence of the licence after which these 

shall be handed over to the State Forest Department or any other 

authority as may be nominated by the Central or State Government; 

  

(c) restore, to the extent possible, other flora destroyed by prospecting 

operations. 

 

(xi) the licensee shall pay to the occupier of surface of the land such 

compensation as may become payable under these rules; 

 

(xii) the licensee shall comply with the Mineral Conservation and 

Development Rules framed under section 18. 

 
1
[Omitted] 

 

(2) A prospecting licence may contain such other conditions relating to the 

following as the State Government may think fit to impose, namely :- 

 

(i) compensation for damage to land in respect of which the licence 
has been granted; 

 

(ii) indemnity to Government against the claim of a third party for any 

damage, injury or disturbance caused to him by the licensee; 

 

(iii) restrictions regarding felling of trees on unoccupied and  

unreserved Government land; 

 

(iv) restrictions on prospecting operations in any area prohibited by any 

competent authority; 

 

(v) operations in a reserved or protected forest; 

 

(vi) conditions regarding entry on occupied land; 

 

(vii) facilities to be given by the licensee for working other minerals in 

the licenced area or adjacent areas; 

 

 (viii) filing of civil suits or petitions relating to disputes arising out of   

  the area under prospecting licence. 

 
1.Omitted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000. 



 14 

1
[(3) The State Government may, either with the previous approval of the 

Central Government or at the instance of the Central Government, impose such 

further conditions as may be necessary in the interest of mineral development,  

including development of atomic minerals.] 

 

(4) In the case of breach of any condition imposed on any holder of 

prospecting licence by or under this rule, the State Government may, by order in 

writing, cancel the licence and/or forfeit, in whole or part, the amount deposited 

by the licensee under rule 20 : 

 

Provided that no such order shall be made without giving the licensee a 

reasonable opportunity of stating his case. 

 

15. Licence to be executed within three months : - (1) Where on any 

application for a prospecting licence an order has been made for  the grant of such 

licence, a deed granting such licence shall be executed within ninety days of the 

date of the communication of the order or such further period as the State 

Government may allow in this behalf, and if no such deed is executed within the 

said period due to any default on the part of the applicant, the State Government 

may revoke the order granting the licence and in that event the fee paid shall be 

forfeited to the State Government. 

. 

        (2) The deed referred to in sub-rule (1) shall be in Form F, or in a form as 

near thereto as circumstances of each case may require. 

  

(3) The date of the commencement of the period for which a prospecting 

licence  is  granted  shall be  the  date   on  which   the   deed  is   executed   under  

sub-rule (1). 

 
2[15A. Where on an application for grant of sanction to transfer the 

prospecting licence under clause (vii) of sub-rule (1) of rule 14, the State 

Government has granted sanction for transfer of such licence, a transfer deed in 

Form P, or a form as near thereto as possible shall be executed within three 

months of the date of the consent, or within such further period as the State 

Government may allow in this behalf.] 

 

16. Report of information obtained by the licensee :-  (1) The licensee 

shall submit to the State Government a six monthly  report  of the work done by 

him stating the number of persons engaged and disclosing in full the geological, 

geophysical or other valuable  data collected by him during the period. The report 

shall be submitted within three months of the close of the period to which it  

relates. 

 
1. Substituted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000. 

2. Inserted by G.S.R.31(E), dated 22.1.2001.  
 

 



 15 

(2) The licensee shall also submit to the State Government within three 

months of the expiry of the licence, or abandonment of operations or termination 

of the licence, whichever is earlier, a full report of  work done by him and all 

information relevant to mineral resources acquired by him in the course of 

prospecting operations in the area covered by the licence. 

 

(3) While submitting reports under sub-rules (1) or (2), the licensee may 

specify that the whole or any part of the report or data submitted by him shall be 

kept confidential; and the State Government shall thereupon, keep the specified 

portions as confidential for a period of two years from the expiry  of the licence, 

or abandonment of operations or termination of the  licence, whichever is earlier. 

 

17.  ( Omitted ) 
 

18. Maintenance of accounts :- Every licensee shall maintain 
1
[an 

accurate] and faithful account of all expenses incurred by him on prospecting 

operations and also the quantity and other particulars of all minerals obtained 

during such operations and their despatch. 

 

19. Inspection :- (1)  The licensee shall allow every officer authorised by 

the Central Government or the State Government in this behalf to examine at any 

time accounts maintained under rule 18 and furnish the Central Government or 

the State Government such information and returns as it or any officer authorised 

by it in that behalf may require. 

 

(2) The licensee shall allow any officer authorised by the Central 

Government or the State Government in this behalf to inspect any prospecting 

operations carried on by him. 

 

20. Security deposit :- (1) An applicant for a prospecting licence shall, 

before the deed referred to in sub-rule (1) of rule 15 is executed, deposit as 

security for the due observance of the terms and conditions of the licence 
2
[a sum 

of two thousand and five hundred rupees] in respect of the every square kilometre 

or part thereof for which the licence is granted. 

 

(2) Any deposit made under sub-rule (1), if not forfeited under these rules, 

shall be refunded to the applicant as soon as the report referred to in rule 16 is 

submitted. 

 

21. Registers :- (1) A register of applications for prospecting licences 

shall be maintained by the State Government in Form G.  

 

(2) A register of prospecting licences shall be maintained by the State 

Government in Form H. 

_________________________________________________________________ 
1. Substituted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000. 
2. Substituted by G.S.R. 21 (E), dated 11.1.2002. 



 16 

CHAPTER IV 
Grant of mining leases in respect of land in which 

the minerals vest in the Government 

          

   22. Applications for grant of mining leases :- (1) An application for 

the grant of a mining lease in respect of land in which the minerals vest in the 

Government shall be made to the State Government in Form I through such 

officer or authority as the State Government may specify in this behalf. 

 

(2) Omitted. 

 

(3) (i) Every application for the grant or renewal of a mining lease shall be    

          accompanied by - 

 

(a) 1[a 2[non refundable] fee of two thousand and five hundred   
       rupees]; 

 

(b) Omitted. 

(c) Omitted. 

 

(d) A valid clearance certificate in the form prescribed by the State   

Government, of payment of mining dues, such as royalty or 

dead rent and surface rent payable under the Act or the rules 

made thereunder, from that Government or any officer or 

authority authorised by that Government in this behalf : 

 

Provided that in case the applicant is a partnership firm or a private limited 

company, such certificate shall be furnished by all  partners of the partnership 

firm or, as the case may be, all members of the private limited company : 

 
3
[Provided  that where any injunction has been issued by a court of law or 

any other competent authority staying the recovery of any such mining dues or 

income tax  non-payment thereof shall not be treated as a disqualification for the 

purpose of granting or renewing the said mining lease : 

 

Provided that where a person has furnished an affidavit to the satisfaction 

of the State Government stating that he does not hold and has not held a  mining  

lease, it shall not be necessary for him to produce the said valid clearance 

certificate : 

 

Provided that a properly sworn affidavit stating that no dues are 

outstanding shall suffice subject to the condition that the certificate required as 

above  shall  be furnished  within  ninety  days of  the date of  application and  the  

 
1. Substituted by G.S.R. 21 (E), dated 11.1.2002. 

2. Inserted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000. 

3. Ibid. 



 17 

application shall become invalid if the party fails to file the certificate within the 

said ninety days : 

 

Provided  further  that   the   grant  of   a   clearance  certificate under sub- 

clause (d) shall not  discharge the holder of such certificate from the liability to 

pay the mining dues which may subsequently be found to be payable by him 

under the Act or rules made thereunder.] 

 

(e) Omitted. 

 

(f) an affidavit stating that the  applicant has - 

 

        (i) filed up-to-date income-tax returns;  

     (ii) paid the income-tax assessed on him; and 

          (iii) paid the income-tax on the basis of self-assessment   
                               as provided in the Income  Tax Act, 1961; 

 

(g) an affidavit showing particulars of area mineral-wise in 
1
[the]   

      State, which the applicant or any person jointly with him - 

  

(i)  already holds under a mining lease; 

    (ii)  has already applied for but not granted; 

    (iii)  being applied for simultaneously;  

 

(h) a statement in writing that the applicant has, where the land is   

      not owned by him, obtained surface rights over the area or has   

      obtained the consent of the owner for starting mining         

      operations : 

  

Provided that no such statement shall be necessary where the land is 

owned by the Government : 

 

Provided further that the consent of the owner for starting mining 

operations in the area or part thereof may be furnished after execution of the lease 

deed but before entry into the said area: 

 

Provided also that no further consent would be required in the case of 

renewal where consent has already been obtained during grant of the lease.  
 

2
 [Omitted] 

 
3 
[Omitted] 

 
4
 [Omitted] 

 
5
 [Omitted] 

 
1. Substituted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000. 

2. Omitted by G.S.R. 56 (E),  dated 17.1.2000.  

3. Ibid.                               4. Ibid.                                   5. Ibid.  



 18 

   (i a) The State Government may, for reasons to be recorded in writing,  

relax the provision of sub-clause (d) of clause (i). 

      

     (ii)  Every application for the grant of a mining lease shall in addition to    

                       those  specified  in  clause (i)  be accompanied by a deposit of one     

                       thousand   rupees   for  meeting  the  preliminary  expenses   in                            

                       connection with the grant of the mining lease : 

 

Provided that the applicant shall deposit such further deposit as may be 

asked for by the State Government, within one month from the date of demand of 

such deposit. 

 

(4) On receipt of the application for the grant of a mining lease the State 

Government shall take decision to grant precise area for the said purpose and 

communicate such decision to the applicant .  On receipt of communication from 

the State Government of the precise area to be granted, the applicant shall submit 

a mining plan within a period of six months or such other period as may be 

allowed by the State Government, to the Central Government for its approval.  

The applicant shall submit the mining plan, duly approved by the Central 

Government or  by an officer duly authorised by the Central Government, to the 

State Government to grant mining lease over that area. 

 
1
[(4A) 

2 
[Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (4), the State 

Government shall be competent to approve mining plan of open cast mines (mines 

other than the underground mines) in respect of the following non-metallic or 

industrial minerals in their respective territorial jurisdiction, namely:-  

 

( i ) Agate 

(ii) Ball Clay 
(iii) Barytes 
(iv) Calcareous Sand 
(v) Calcite 
(vi) Chalk 
(vii) Clay (Others) 
(viii) Corundum 
(ix) Diaspore 
(x) Dolomite 
(xi) Dunite/pyroxenite 
(xii) Felsite 
(xiii) Felspar 
(xiv) Fireclay 
(xv) Fusch. Quartzite 
(xvi) Gypsum 
(xvii) Jasper 

__________________________________________________________________ 
1. Inserted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000. 

2. Substituted by G.S.R. 743 (E), dated 25.9.2000. 



 19 

(xviii) Kaolin 
(xix) Laterite 
(xx)     Limekankar 

(xxi) Ochre 
(xxii) Pyrophyllite 
(xxiii) Quartz 
(xxiv) Quartzite 
(xxv) Sand (Others) 
(xxvi) Shale 
(xxvii) Silica Sand 
(xxviii)Slate 

(xxix) Steatite/Talc/Soapstone ] 
 
1
[Provided that the State Government shall exercise the power of approval 

of mining plan through an officer or officers who shall possess the following 

qualification,
2
[experience and post or pay scale], namely :- 

 

(i) a degree in Mining Engineering or post-graduate degree in 
Geology from a University established or incorporated by or under 

a Central Act, a Provincial Act or a State Act, including any 

institution recognized by the University Grants Commission 

established under section 4 of the University Grants Commission 

Act, 1956 (3 of 1956) or any equivalent qualification granted by 

any University or Institution outside India; 

 

(ii) professional experience of twelve years in case of a Mining 
Engineer in the field of mining engineering and professional 

experience of eighteen years in case of a Geologist in the field of 

geological survey after obtaining the qualification as specified in 

clause (i) in each case; and 

 
3
[(iii)  in  the  post  of  Director or Additional Director or Joint Director of   

the concerned State Government or in the pay scale, the maximum 

of which shall not be less than Rs.15,850/- (Rupees fifteen thousand 

eight hundred and fifty) per month:] 

 

Provided further that the list of the officers fulfilling the qualification, 
4
[experience and post or pay-scale] specified in the first proviso shall be sent to 

the Controller General, Indian Bureau of Mines by the Sate Governments from 

time to time for the purposes of that proviso]; 

  

Provided 
5
[also] where any State Government does not have such officer 

as  having  the  requisite  qualifications  and  experience, the power of approval of  

   
1. Substituted by G.S.R.31(E), dated 22.1.2001. 2. Substituted by G.S.R.733(E), dated 29.10.2002. 

3. Ibid.                  4. Ibid.                                     5. Substituted by G.S.R. 31 (E), dated 22.1.2001. 

 



 20 

mining plan, as aforesaid, in respect of that State shall be exercised by the Central 

Government : 

 

Provided also that in the event of the State Government having officer or 

officers  with requisite  qualifications  and  experience  from any date in future the  

State government shall report the matter to the Controller General, Indian Bureau  

of Mines and the State Government shall exercise the power of approval of 

mining plan, as aforesaid, thereafter without any reference to the Central 

Government.] 

 
1
[(4B) The Central Government or the State Government shall dispose of  

the application for approval of the mining plan within a period of ninety days 

from the date of receiving of such application: 

   

Provided that the aforesaid period of ninety days shall be applicable only 

if the mining plan is complete in all respects, and in case of any modifications 

subsequently suggested by the Central Government or the State Government, as 

the case may be, after the initial submission of the mining plan for approval, the 

said period shall be applicable from the date on which such  modifications are 

carried out and submitted afresh to the Central Government or the State 

Government, as the case may be.] 

 

(5) The Mining Plan shall incorporate :- 

 
2
[(i) the plan of the lease hold area showing the nature and extent of the 

mineral body, spot or spots where the mining operations are 

proposed to be based on the prospecting data gathered by the 

applicant or any other person];  

 

(ii) details of the geology and lithology of the area including mineral 
reserves of the area; 

 

(iii) the extent of manual mining or mining by the use of machinery and 
mechanical devices; 

 

(iv) the plan of the area showing natural water courses, limits of 
reserves and other forest areas and density of trees, if any, 

assessment of impact of mining activity on forest, land surface and 

environment including air and water pollution; details of scheme of 

restoration of the area by afforestation, land reclamation, use of 

pollution control devices and such other measures as may be 

directed by the Central Government or the State Government from 

time to time;  

 

__________________________________________________________________ 
1. Inserted by G.S.R.21 (E), dated 11.1.2002.  2. Substituted by G.S.R.56 (E), dated 

17.1.2000. 



 21 

1
[(v) a tentative scheme of mining and annual programme and plan for 

excavation from year to year for five years; 
2
[omitted] 

 
              3 

[ (va)   a progressive mine closure plan as defined in clause (oo) of  rule 3 

                       of the Mineral Conservation and Development Rules, 1988; and] 

 

(vi) any other matter which the Central Government may require the   

            applicant to provide in the mining plan. 
 

4
[(6) The mining plan once approved shall be valid for the entire duration of 

the lease: 

 

Provided that any modification or modifications of the mining plan shall 

be  approved by the competent authority and such approval of the modified 

mining plan shall remain valid for the balance duration of the mining lease.] 

 

22A. Mining  operations to be in accordance with Mining Plans :- 

(1) Mining operations shall be undertaken in accordance with the duly  
approved mining plan.  

 

(2) Modification of the approved mining plan during the operation of a 

mining lease also requires prior approval. 

  

22B.  Mining  plan to be  prepared  by  recognised   persons :- (1)  No  

mining plan shall be approved unless it is prepared by a qualified person 

recognised in this behalf by the Central Government, or duly authorised officer. 

 

(2) No person shall be recognised by the Central Government for purposes 

of sub-rule (1) unless he holds- 

 

(i)  a degree in mining engineering or post-graduate degree in Geology 

granted by a University established or incorporated by or under a 

Central Act, a Provincial Act or a State Act, including any institution 

recognised by the University Grants Commission established under 

section 4 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 or any 

equivalent qualification granted  by any University or Institution 

outside India; and 

 

(ii) Professional experience of five years of working in a supervisory 

      capacity in the field of mining after obtaining the degree. 

 

(3) A person recognisesd to prepare a mining plan may also carry out 

modifications of an existing mining plan. 

   

 

1. Substituted by G.S.R.56 (E), dated 17.1. 2000      2. Omitted by G.S.R. 329 (E). dated 10.4 2003 

3. Inserted by G.S.R. 329 (E), dated 10.4.2003.        4. Inserted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000. 



 22 

1
[22BB. Procedure for approval of mining plans : - (1) Notwithstanding the  

provisions of rule 63 the mining plan shall be submitted for approval through 

authority notified by the Controller General of the Indian Bureau of Mines or by  

the State Government, as the case may be, in this behalf, except for minerals 

specified in Part A and B of the First Schedule to the Act. 

 

 
2
[(1a) Every mining plan submitted for approval under sub-rule(1) shall be 

accompanied with a  non-refundable fee of one thousand rupees for every square 

kilometre, or part thereof of mining area covered under the mining lease.] 

 

 (2) Notwithstanding the provisions of the rule 54, any person aggrieved 

by any order made or direction issued in respect of mining plan by an officer of 

the Central Government  competent to approve mining plans other than the Chief 

Controller of Mines, Indian Bureau of Mines, for minerals other than those listed 

in Part A and B of the First Schedule to the Act, may  within thirty days of the 

communication of such order or direction, apply to the authority to whom the said 

officer is immediately subordinate, for the revision of the order or direction: 

 

            Provided that any such application may be entertained after the said period 

of thirty days if the applicant satisfies the authority that he had sufficient cause for 

not making the application within time;  

 

(3) On receipt of any application for revision under sub-rule (1), the 

authority after giving a reasonable opportunity of being  heard to the aggrieved 

person, may confirm, modify or set aside the order made or direction issued by 

any officer subordinate to him. 

 

(4) Any person aggrieved by an order made or direction issued by the 

Chief Controller of Mines, Indian Bureau of Mines, concerning approval of 

mining plan may within thirty days of the communication of such order or 

direction, apply  to the  Controller General, Indian Bureau of Mines for a revision 

of such order or direction and his decision thereon shall be final :  

 

Provided that any such application may be entertained after the said period 

of thirty days, if the applicant satisfies the Controller General, Indian Bureau of 

Mines that he had sufficient cause for not making the application in time. 

 

(5) On receipt of any such application under sub-rule (4), the Controller 

General, Indian Bureau of Mines may confirm, modify or set aside the order  or 

direction issued by the Chief Controller of Mines, Indian Bureau of Mines. 

 

(6)  (a) Notwithstanding anything contained in the above sub-rules, any 

person aggrieved by any order or direction issued in respect of a mining plan by  

   
1  Substituted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000.      2. Inserted by G.S.R. 21 (E), dated 11.1.2002. 

 

 



 23 

 

an authorised officer of the State Government, may within thirty days of the 

communication of such order or direction, apply to the Controller General, Indian 

Bureau of Mines for revision of the order or direction and his decision thereon 

shall be final. 

(b)  The  procedure  enumerated  in  the  preceding  sub-rules shall,  

mutatis mutandis, be followed in the disposal of such an application. 

 

(7) The powers under sub-rules (1) and (2) in regard to approval of mining 

plans shall be exercised by Director, Atomic Minerals Directorate for Exploration 

and Research, Hyderabad, and in regard to revision under sub-rules (3) to (5) shall 

be exercised by Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy, Mumbai, insofar as 

they relate to atomic minerals specified in Part B of the First Schedule to the Act.  

 

(8) The powers under sub- rules (1) to (5) in regard to approval of mining 

plan and revision shall be exercised by authorities designated in this behalf by 

notification by the Department of Coal insofar as they relate to coal and lignite 

specified in Part A of the First Schedule to the Act.]  

 

22C. Grant of recognition by Central Government : - (1) Any person 

possessing the qualifications and experience referred to in  sub-rule (2) of rule 

22B may apply for being recognised as a recognised person to the competent 

authority appointed for the purpose by the Central Government. 

 

(2) The competent authority, after making such enquiry as it deems fit, 

may grant or refuse to grant recognition and where recognition is refused, the 

competent authority shall record reasons in writing and communicate the same to 

the applicant. 

 
1
[(3) A recognition shall be granted for an initial period of ten years and 

may be renewed for a period(s)  not exceeding ten years at a time :  

 

Provided that the competent authority may refuse to renew recognition for 

reasons to be recorded in writing after giving an opportunity of hearing to the 

person concerned.]    
 

2
[(4)An appeal shall lie to the Controller General, Indian Bureau of Mines, 

against the order of the competent authority refusing to grant or renew an 

application for recognition and his order thereon shall be final. 

 

Explanation :  For the purpose of this rule, Chief Controller of Mines, 

Controller of Mines and the Regional Controller of Mines shall be deemed to be 

competent authority.] 
_______________________________________________________________________________ 

1. Substituted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000.         2. Ibid. 

 



 24 

1
[22 D. Minimum size of the mining lease.- Minimum area for grant of mining 

lease shall not be less than - 

 

a) One hectare, in respect of small deposits (not fragmented portions 

of larger ones), shallow in nature, isolated and not exceeding more 

than 200 metres in strike  length.  These  deposits  are  small  by 

virtue of  either origin  or   mode   of  emplacement or dislocation 

due to geological disturbances. 

Small deposits shall also include float deposits (transported) 

formed due to mechanical weathering and deposition, alluvial or eluvial 

placers (buried or otherwise), which generally have peculiar 

configurations excepting beach sands or placers; 

 

(b) Two hectares, in respect of beach sands or placers. Beach sands or 

placers are mono or multi mineral concentrations, including the 

dunes occurring on and off the coastal shore line. These deposits 

are the products of ebb and flow of tides, waves and inshore 

currents, and at places semi-consolidated to consolidated in nature;  

 

(c) Four hectares, in respect of all mineral deposits other than those 

specified under clauses (a) and (b).] 

 
2
[ “Provided that in the case of renewal of mining lease, the restrictions of      

minimum area for grant of mining lease shall not be applicable”.] 

 

23. Acknowledgement of application :- (1) Where an application for the 

grant or renewal of a mining lease is delivered personally, its receipt shall be 

acknowledged forthwith. 

 

(2) Where such application is received by registered post, its receipt shall 

be acknowledged on the same day. 

 

(3) In  any  other  case,  the  receipt  of  such  application  shall  be 

acknowledged within three days of the receipt. 

 

(4) The  receipt  of  every  such  application  shall  be  acknowledged  in  

Form D. 

  

23A. Omitted. 

 

24. Disposal of  application for mining lease :-  (1)  Omitted. 

  (2)  Omitted.             

(3)  Omitted. 

(4) Where an application for a mining lease for a mineral or minerals not 

specified in the existing mining lease or mining leases   is  made  for  the whole or  
_______________________________________________________________________________ 

1. Inserted by G.S.R. 329 (E), dated 10.4.2003.         2. Inserted by G.S.R. 49 (E), dated 28.1.2005. 



 25 

part of the area held under mining lease by a person other than the lessee, the 

State Government shall notify this fact by registered post/ Acknowledgement Due  

to the person who already holds mining leases for another mineral in the land 

applied for. 

 

(5) (a) If on receipt of the information referred to in sub-rule  (4), from   

the State Government, the lessee applies either for   prospecting 

licence or mining lease for newly discovered mineral or  minerals 

within six months from the date of communication of the 

information by the State Government, the lessee shall be preferred   

in respect of such grant.  

 

(b) If the  lessee  fails to apply for prospecting licence or mining lease 

      within six  months, then this fact will be intimated to the applicant    

      by  the State Government and the State Government will  consider   

      the original application in accordance with the rules. 

 

(6) Omitted. 
 

            24A. Renewal of mining lease :- (1) An application for the renewal of a 

mining lease shall be made to the State Government in Form J, at least twelve 

months before the  date on which the lease is due to expire, through such officer 

or   authority as the State Government may specify in this behalf. 

 

            
1
[(2) The renewal or renewals of a mining lease granted in respect of a 

mineral specified in Part ‘A’ and Part ‘B’ of the First Schedule to the Act may be 

granted by the State Government with the previous approval of the Central 

Government.]  

 
2
[(3) The renewal  or  renewals of a mining lease granted  in  respect  of  a 

mineral not specified in Part ‘A’ and Part ‘B’ of the First Schedule to the Act may 

be granted by the State Government.] 

 
                 3

[Provided that before granting approval for second or subsequent renewal 

of a mining lease, the State Government shall seek a report from the Controller 

General, Indian Bureau of Mines, as to whether it would be in the interest   of    

mineral development to grant the renewal of the mining lease. 

 

             Provided  further that in case a report is not received from Controller 

General, Indian Bureau of Mines in a period of three months of receipt of the 

communication from the State Government, it would be deemed that the Indian 

Bureau of Mines has no adverse comments to offer regarding the grant of the 

renewal of mining lease.] 

 

__________________________________________________________________ 
1. Substituted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000.                           2. Ibid. 

3.Inserted by G.S.R. 21(E), dated 11.1.2002. 



 26 

            (4)  Omitted. 

(5) Omitted. 
 

(6) If an application for renewal of a mining lease made within  the time 

referred to in sub-rule (1) is not disposed of by the State  Government before the 

date of expiry of the lease, the period of that lease shall be deemed to have been  

extended by a further period till  the State Government passes order thereon. 
 

1
[(7)  Omitted.] 

 

(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1) and sub-rule (6) an 

application for the first renewal of a mining lease, so declared under the 

provisions  of  section  4  of   the  Goa,  Daman   and   Diu   Mining   Concessions  

 (Abolition and Declaration as Mining Leases)  Act, 1987, shall be made to the 

State Government in Form J before the  expiry of the period of mining lease in 

terms of sub-section (1) of  section 5 of the said Act, through such office or 

authority as the  State Government may specify in this behalf : 

     

 Provided that the State Government may, for reasons to be recorded   in 

writing and subject to such conditions as it may think fit, allow extension of time 

for making of such application up to a total  period not exceeding one year. 

 

(9) If an application for first renewal made within the time referred to in 

sub-rule (8) or within the time allowed by the State Government under the proviso 

to sub-rule (8), the period of that  lease shall be deemed to have been extended by 

a further period till  the State Government passes orders thereon. 

 
                2

[(10) The State Government may condone delay in an application for  

renewal of mining lease made after the time limit prescribed  in sub-rule (1) 

provided the application has been made before the expiry of the lease.] 

 

            24B. Renewal of a mining lease in favour of a person using the 
mineral in his own   industry :- Every person who is holding a mining lease for 

a mineral which is used in his own industry shall be entitled for the renewal of his  

mining lease for a period not exceeding twenty years unless he  applies for a 

lesser period. 

 

Explanation :- "Own industry" means an industry of which the lessee  is 

the owner or in which he holds not less than fifty percent of  controlling interest. 

 
3
[ 25. Omitted.] 

 

 

 

_________________________________________________________________ 
1 Omitted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000. 2. Substituted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000.       

3. Omitted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000 



 27 

25A. Status of the grant on the death of applicant for mining lease :-              

 

(1) Where an applicant for a grant or renewal of mining lease dies  before 

the order granting him a mining lease or its renewal is  passed, the application for 

the grant or renewal of a mining lease  shall be deemed to have been made by his 

legal representative. 

 

(2) In the case of an applicant in respect of whom an order granting or  
renewing a mining lease is passed, but who dies before the deed  

referred to in sub-rule (1) of rule 31 is executed, the order shall  be 

deemed to have been passed in the name of the legal representative of 

the deceased. 

 

26. Refusal of application for grant and renewal of mining lease:- 

 

(1) The State Government may, after giving an opportunity of being heard 

and for reasons to be recorded in writing and  communicated to the applicant, 

refuse to grant or renew a mining  lease over the whole or part of the area applied 

for. 

(2) An application for the grant or renewal of a mining lease made  under 

rule 22 or rule 24A, as the case may be, shall not be refused  by the State 

Government only on the ground that Form I or Form J, as  the case may be, is not 

complete in all material particulars, or is  not accompanied by the documents 

referred  to  in  sub-clauses  (d), (e), (f), (g)  and (h) of  clause  (i) of sub-rule 3 of  

rule 22. 

 

(3) Where it appears that the application is not complete in all  material 

particulars or is not accompanied by the required documents, the State 

Government shall, by  notice, require the  applicant to  supply the omission  or,  as  

the case may be, furnish the  documents, without delay and in any case not later 

than 
1
[thirty days]  from the date of receipt of the said notice by the applicant. 

 
2
[“(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule(1) where an  

applicant for renewal of mining lease under rule 24A is convicted of illegal 

mining, and there are no interim orders of any court of law suspending the 

operation of the order of such conviction in appeals pending against such 

conviction in any court of law the State Government may after giving such 

applicant an opportunity of being heard and for reasons to be recorded in writing 

and communicated to the applicant, refuse to renew such mining lease”] 

 

27. Conditions :-  (1) Every mining lease shall be subject to the  

following conditions :- 

 

__________________________________________________________________ 
1. Substituted by G.S.R.733(E), dated 29.10.2002 
2. Inserted by G.S.R.593(E), dated 26.7.2012. 

 



 28 

(a) the lessee shall report to the State Government the  discovery in the  
leased area of any mineral not specified in the  lease, within sixty days of such 

discovery; 

 

(b) if any mineral not specified in the lease is discovered in  the leased   
area, the lessee shall not win and dispose of such  mineral unless such mineral is 

included in the lease or a  separate lease is obtained therefor; 

 

     (c) the lessee shall pay, for every year, except the first year  of the 

lease, such yearly dead rent at the rates specified in the Third Schedule of the Act 

and if the lease permits the working of more than one mineral in the same area the 

State Government  shall not charge separate dead rent in respect of each mineral : 

 

Provided that the lessee shall be liable to pay the dead rent or royalty in 

respect of each mineral whichever be higher in amount   but not both; 

 

     (d) the lessee shall also pay,  for the surface area used by him for  the 

purposes of mining operations, surface rent and water rate at  such rate, not 

exceeding the land revenue, water and cesses  assessable on the land, as may be 

specified by the state  Government in the lease;          

 

(e) Omitted. 
 

(f) The  lessee  shall  commence  mining  operations  within  two years  
from the date of execution of the lease and shall thereafter conduct such 

operations in a proper, skillful and workman-like manner. 

 

Explanation :- For the purpose of this clause, mining operations shall 

include the erection of machinery, laying of a tramway or  construction of a road 

in connection with the working of the   mine;  

 

     (g) the lessee shall at his own expenses erect and at all times  maintain 

and keep in good repair boundary marks and pillars necessary to indicate the 

demarcation shown in the plan annexed  to the lease; 

 

     (h) the lessee shall not carry on, or allow to be carried on, any  mining  

operations at any point within a distance of fifty meters from any railway line, 

except  under  and in  accordance  with  the  written   permission   of  the   railway  

administration concerned or  under or beneath any ropeway or ropeway trestle or 

station, except under and in accordance with the written permission of  the 

authority owning the ropeway or from any reservoir, canal or  other public  works, 

or buildings, except under and in accordance  with the previous permission of the 

State Government; 

 

 

 



 29 

     (i) the lessee shall keep 
1
[ accurate and faithful ] accounts showing the  

quantity  and other particulars of all minerals obtained and despatched  from the 

mine, the number and nationality of persons employed therein, and complete 

plans of the mine, and shall allow any officer authorised by the Central 

Government or the State Government in this behalf to examine at any time any 

accounts, plans and records maintained by him and shall furnish the Central or the 

State Government with such information and returns as  it or any officer 

authorised by it in this behalf may require; 

 

 

     (j) the lessee shall keep accurate records of all trenches, pits  and 

drillings made by him in the course of mining operations carried on by him under 

the lease, and shall allow any officer authorised by the Central or the State 

Government to inspect the  same. Such records shall contain the following 

particulars, namely :- 

 

(a) the subsoil and strata through which such trenches, pits or 
drillings pass; 

 

(b) any mineral encountered;  
 

(c) such other particulars as the Central or the State Government 
may from time to time require; 

 

                  (k) the lessee shall strengthen and support, to the satisfaction of the 

railway administration concerned or the State Government,  as the case may be 

any part of the mine which in its opinion  requires such strengthening or support 

for the safety of any  railway, reservoir, canal, road or any other public works or  

buildings; 

 

     (l) the lessee shall allow any officer authorised by the Central  or the 

State Government to enter upon any building, excavation  or land comprised in 

the lease for the purpose of inspecting the   same; 

 

    (m) the State Government shall at all times have the right of pre-

emption of the minerals won from the land in respect of   which the lease has been 

granted:  

 

Provided that the fair market price prevailing at the time of   pre-emption 

shall be paid to the lessee for all such minerals. 

 

    (n) the lessee shall store properly the unutilized or non-saleable sub-

grade  ores or minerals for future beneficiation ; 

__________________________________________________________________ 
1. Substituted by G.S.R.56 (E), dated 17.1.2000 

 

 



 30 

   (o) in respect of any mineral which in relation to its use for  certain 

purposes is classified as a major mineral and in relation to its use for other 

purposes as a minor mineral, the lessee who holds a lease for extraction of such 

minerals under   these rules whether or not it is specified as a major mineral in   

the lease deed, shall not use or sell the mineral or deal with it in whatsoever 

manner or knowingly allow anyone to use or sell   the mineral or deal with it in 

whatsoever manner as a minor   mineral : 

 

Provided that if on an application made to it in this behalf by the lessee, 

the State Government is satisfied that having regard  to the inferior quality of such 

mineral, it cannot be used for any of the purposes by  reason of which use it can 

be called   a major mineral or that there is no market for such mineral as a major 

mineral, the State Government may by order permit the  lessee to dispose of the 

mineral in such quantity and in such manner as may be specified therein as a 

minor mineral. 

 

    (p) the lessee shall, in the matter of employment, give  preference to the 

 tribals and to the persons who become  displaced because of the taking up of 

mining operations; 

 

    (q) the lessee shall not pay a wage not less than the minimum  wage   

prescribed by the Central or State Government from time to  time under the 

Minimum Wages Act, 1948; 

 

    (r) the lessee shall observe the provisions of Mines Act, 1952 
1
[(35 of 

1952) and of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962, (33 of 1962) insofar as they relate to 

Atomic Minerals included in Part ‘B’ of the First Schedule to the Act;]  

 

    (s) the lessee shall – 

 

(i) take  immediate  measures for  planting in  the same area or 
any  other area selected by the Central or State Government 

not less  than twice the number of trees destroyed by 

reasons of any  mining operations; 

 

(ii) look after them during the subsistence of the lease after  
which these trees shall be handed over to the State Forest  

Department or any other authority nominated by the 

Central or State Government; 

 

(iii) restore, to the extent possible other flora destroyed by  the 
mining operations; 

 

__________________________________________________________________ 
1. Inserted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000. 

 

 



 31 

    (t)  the lessee shall pay to the occupier of the surface of the land such  

compensation as may become payable under these rules; 

 

    (u) the lessee shall comply with the Mineral Conservation and 

Development Rules framed under section 18; 

 

(2) A mining lease  may  contain  such  other  conditions  as  the  State 

Government may deem necessary in regard to the following, namely :-  

 

(a) the time-limit, mode and place of payment of rents and  

royalties; 

(b) the compensation for damage to the land covered by the  

lease;  

 

(c)  the felling of trees;  
(d)  the restriction of surface operations in any area prohibited    
             by  any authority; 

(e) the notice by lessee for surface occupation; 
(f) the provision of proper weighing machines;  
(g) the facilities to be given by the lessee for working other  

 minerals in the leased area or adjacent area;  

(h) the entering and working in a reserved or protected forest;  
(i) the securing of pits and shafts;  
(j) the reporting of accidents;  
(k) the indemnity to Government against claims of third 

parties; 

(l) the delivery of possession of lands and mines on the 
surrender, expiration or determination of the lease; 

1
[(la)  the time limit for removal of mineral, ore, plant, machinery  

 and other properties from the lease hold area after expirati-  

 on, or  sooner determination or surrender or abandonment   

 of the mining lease;]  

(m) the forfeiture of property left after determination of lease; 
(n) the power to take possession of plant, machinery, premises 

and mines in the event of war or emergency;  

(o) filing of civil suits or petitions relating to disputes arising 
out of the area under lease. 

 
2
[(3) The State Government may, either with the previous approval of the 

Central Government or at the instance of the Central Government, impose such 

further  conditions as may be necessary in the interests of mineral development, 

including development of atomic minerals.] 

 

_________________________________________________________________ 
1. Inserted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000.       2.Substituted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000.  
 



 32 

(4) If the lessee  does  not  allow  entry or  inspection under clause (i), (j) 

or (l) of sub-rule (1), the State Government  shall  give  notice in writing  to the  

lessee  requiring  him to show  cause  within such  time  as may be specified in the 

notice why the lease should not be determined and his security deposits forfeited; 

and if the lessee fails to show cause within the aforesaid time to the satisfaction of 

the State Government, the State Government may determine the lease and forfeit 

the whole or part of the security deposit. 

 
1
[“(4A) If the lessee holding a mining lease or a licencee holding a 

prospecting licence, is convicted of illegal mining and there are no interim orders 

of any court of law suspending the operation of the order of such conviction in 

appeals pending against such conviction in any court of law, the State 

Government may, without prejudice to any other proceedings that may be taken 

under the Act or the rules framed thereunder, after giving such lessee or licencee 

an opportunity of  being heard and for reasons to be recorded in writing and 

communicated to the lessee or licencee, determine such mining lease or, as the 

case may be, cancel such prospecting licence and forfeit whole or part  of the  

security deposit.”] 

  

(5) If the lessee makes any  default in the  payment  of  royalty as  required  

under  section 9 or payment of dead rent as required under  section 9A or commits 

a breach of any of the conditions specified in  sub-rules (1), (2) and (3), except the 

condition referred to in  clause (f) of sub-rule (1), the State Government shall give 

notice  to the lessee requiring him to pay the royalty or dead  rent or  remedy  the  

breach, as the case may be, within  sixty days  from the date of the receipt of the 

notice and if the royalty or dead rent is  not paid or the breach is not remedied 

within the said period, the  State Government may, without prejudice to any other 

proceedings that may be taken against him, determine the lease and forfeit the 

whole  or part of the security deposit.  

 

28. Lapsing of leases :- (1) Subject to the conditions of this rule where 

mining operations are not commenced within a period  of  two years from the date  

of  execution of the lease,  or is discontinued  for a continuous period of two  

years after commencement of such  operations, the State  Government shall, by an 

order,  declare the mining lease as lapsed and  communicate the declaration to the 

lessee. 

(2) Where a lessee is unable to commence the mining operation within  a 

period  of two years  from the date of execution of  the  mining lease,  or 

discontinues mining operations for a period exceeding two years  for reasons  

beyond his control, he may submit an  application to the  State Government, 

explaining the reasons for the same, at least  three months before the expiry of 

such period ; 

 

(3) Every application under sub-rule (2) shall be accompanied by a   fee of      

Rs.200/-; 

_________________________________________________________________ 
1. Inserted by G.S.R.593(E), dated 26.7.2012. 



 33 

 

(4) The  State Government  may on  receipt of  an  application made under   

sub-rule (2) and on being satisfied about the adequacy and genuineness of the 

reasons for the non-commencement of mining operations or discontinuance 

thereof, pass an order  before the  date on  which the lease  would  have  otherwise  

lapsed, extending or  refusing to extend the period of the lease : 

 

Provided that where the State Government on receipt of an  application 

under sub-rule (2) does not pass an order before the  expiry of the date on which 

the lease would have otherwise lapsed,  the lease shall be deemed to have been 

extended  until  the  order  is  passed  by the State Government or until a period of 

two years,  whichever is earlier. 

 

Explanation 1: Where the non-commencement of the mining operations  

within a period of two years from the date of execution of mining   lease is on 

account of – 

 

(a) delay in acquisition of surface rights; or 
 

(b) delay in getting the possession of the leased area; or  
 

(c) delay in supply or installation of machinery; or 

 

(d) delay in getting financial assistance from the banks, or any 

financial institutions; or  

              

(e) ensuring supply of the mineral in an industry of which the lessee is 
the owner or in which he holds not less than 50% of  the 

controlling interest; 

 

and the lessee is able to furnish documentary evidence supported by a duly sworn 

affidavit, the  State Government may consider if there are sufficient reasons for 

non-commencement of operations for a continuous period of   more than two 

years. 

 

             Explanation 2: Where the discontinuance of mining operations for  a 

continuous period of two years after the commencement of such   operations is on 

account of – 

 

(a) orders passed by any statutory or judicial authority; or  

(b) operations becoming highly uneconomical; or  

(c) strike or lock out;  

 

and  the  lessee  is  able  to  furnish  documentary  evidence  supported  by  a  duly 



 34 

sworn affidavit,  the State Government may consider if there are sufficient 

reasons for discontinuance of operations for a continuous   period of more than 

two years.  

 

 
1
[Explanation 3: In case of mining  lessee who has undertaken 

reconnaissance operations or in case of mining lessee whose capital investment in  

mine development  is  planned  to be in excess  of  Rs. 200 crores  and  where  the 

mine development is likely to take more than two years,  the State Government 

shall consider it to be sufficient reason for non-commencement of mining 

operations for a continuous period of more than two years.]  

 

28A.(1) Where a lessee is unable to commence the mining operations 

within a period of two years from the date of execution of the mining lease, or 

discontinues mining operations for a period of  exceeding two years for reasons 

beyond his control, he may submit an application to the State Government 

explaining the reasons for the same at least within six months from the date of its 

lapse : 

 

Provided that the lease has not been revived under this provision   for 

more than twice during the entire period of the lease. 

 

 (2) Every application under sub-rule (1) shall be accompanied by a fee of  

Rs 500/-. 

 

 (3) The State Government on receipt of an application made under  sub-

rule (1) and on being satisfied about the adequacy and genuineness of the reasons 

for non-commencement of mining operations  or discontinuance thereof taking 

into consideration the matters  specified in the Explanation to rule 28, pass an 

order reviving the lease. 

 

            29. Restriction on determination of lease :-  (1) The lessee shall not 

determine the lease except after notice in writing of not less than  twelve calendar 

months to the State Government or to such officer,  or authority as the State 

Government may specify in this behalf : 

 

Provided that where a lessee holding a mining lease for a group of  

minerals applies for the surrender of any mineral from the lease on  the ground 

that deposits of that mineral have since exhausted or depleted to such an extent 

that it is no longer economical to work the mineral, the State Government may 

permit the lessee to surrender  that mineral, subject to the following conditions , 

namely :- 

(a) the lessee applies for such surrender of mineral at least six 
months before the intended date of surrender; and  

 

_______________________________________________________________ 
1. Inserted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000. 
 



 35 

(b) the lessee gives an undertaking that he will not cause any 
hindrance in the working of the mineral so surrendered by 

any other person who is subsequently granted a mining 

lease in respect of that mineral : 

 

Provided further that where a lessee applies for the surrender of  the whole 

or a part of lease-hold area on the ground that such area  is barren or the deposits 

of minerals have since exhausted or  depleted to such an extent that it is no longer 

economical to work such  area, the State Government shall permit the lessee, from 

the date of receipt of the application, to surrender that area if the following  

conditions are satisfied, namely :- 

 

(a) the lease-hold area to be surrendered has been properly 

surveyed and is contiguous,  

 

(b) the lessee has paid all the dues payable to the  Government 

under the lease up to the date of   application, and 

 
1
[(c) the lessee has obtained a certificate under rule 29A.] 

 

                        Provided also that surrender of the lease area by the lessee shall  be 

permitted only thrice during the period of the lease on  fulfilling the conditions – 

 

(i) that at least a period of five years has elapsed since the last 

surrender; and  

            

(ii) that the provisions of the mining plan  including the 

environment management  plan thereof  have been 

complied with .  

              

(2) Every application for the surrender of a part of lease-hold  area in 

accordance with the provisions of sub-rule (1), shall be  accompanied by a deposit 

of two hundred rupees for meeting the  expenditure for the purpose of survey and 

demarcation of the area to be surrendered : 

 

Provided that the lessee shall deposit such further amount, not  exceeding 

two hundred rupees, as may be demanded by the State  Government for meeting 

any additional expenditure for the said  purpose within one month from  the date 

of demand of such deposit : 

 

Provided further that where the whole or any part of the amount  deposited 

has not been expended, it shall be refunded to the lessee within two months from 

date of the completion of the work of   survey and demarcation of the area to be 

surrendered . 

__________________________________________________________________ 
1. Inserted by G.S.R. 329 (E), dated 10.4.2003. 
 



 36 

                1
[(3) Upon the issuance of the order by the Regional Controller of Mines or 

the officer authorized by the State Government in this behalf, as the case may be, 

under sub-rule (6) of rule 23F of Mineral Conservation and Development Rules, 

1988, for forfeiting the sum assured, on non-performance of the measures 

contained in the approved mine closure plan referred to in sub-rule (1) of rule 23A 

of Mineral Conservation and Development Rules, 1988 by the lessee, it shall be 

the responsibility of State Government to realize any letter of credit or bond or 

any other surety, guarantee provided or obtained as financial assurance for the 

purpose of performance of protective, reclamation and rehabilitation measures as 

contained in the approved mine closure plan and shall carry out such measures 

either by itself, or appoint an agent to do so.]  

 

          
2
[29A. Provision for closure. - (1) The lessee shall not determine the lease 

or part thereof unless a final mine closure plan duly approved by the Regional 

Controller or the officer authorized by the State Government in this behalf, as the 

case may be, is implemented as per the approval. 

 

(2) For the purposes of sub-rule (1), the lessee shall be required to obtain a 

certificate from the Regional Controller of Mines or officer authorized by the 

State Government in this behalf, as the case may be, to the effect that protective, 

reclamation and rehabilitation work in accordance with the approved mine closure 

plan or with such modifications as approved by the competent authority have been 

carried out by the lessee.] 

 

30. Rights of lessee :- Subject to the conditions mentioned in rule  27, the 

lessee with respect to the land leased to him shall have the  right for the purpose 

of mining operations on that land – 

 

(a) to work the mines; 
(b) to sink pits and shafts and construct buildings  and roads; 
(c) to erect plant and machinery;  
(d) to quarry and obtain building and road materials and  make bricks; 
(e) to use water and take timber;  
(f) to use land for stacking purpose;  
(g) to do any other thing specified in the lease.  

 

31. Lease to be executed within six months:- (1) Where, on an  

application for the grant of a mining lease, an order has been made  for the grant 

of such lease,a lease deed in Form K or in a form as  near thereto as circumstances 

of each case may require, shall be  executed within six months of the order or 

within such further  period as the State Government may allow in this behalf, and 

if no  such lease deed is executed within the said period due to any  default on the 

part of the applicant, the State Government may revoke the order granting the 

lease and in that event the application fee shall be forfeited to the State 

Government. 

__________________________________________________________________ 
1. Inserted by G.S.R. 329 (E), dated 10.4.2003.           2.    Ibid 



 37 

 
1
[(2) The date of the commencement of the period for which a mining  

lease is granted shall be the date on which a duly executed deed   under sub-rule 

(1) is registered.] 

 

32. Security deposit :- An applicant for a mining lease, shall before the 

deed referred to in rule 31 is executed, deposit as security  for the due observance 

of the terms and conditions of the lease 
2
[ten thousand rupees ] . 

 

            33. Survey of the area leased :-When a mining lease is granted by  the 

State Government, arrangements shall be made by the State  Government at the 

expense of the lessee for the survey and  demarcation of the area granted under 

the lease . 

 

34. Manner  of  exercise  of  preferential  rights  for  mining  lease :- 

A mining lease to any person who has a preferential right thereto under 

sub-section (1) of section 11, may at his option, be granted   to him either for the 

whole of the area for which he holds the  prospecting licence or such part or parts 

thereof as he may select  but the State Government may for any special reasons to 

be recorded in  writing reduce the area or exclude a portion therefrom. 

 

            
3
[35. Preferential rights of certain persons:- Where two or more persons 

have applied for a reconnaissance permit or a prospecting licence or a mining 

lease in respect of the same land, the  State Government  shall, for  the  purpose of  

sub-section(2) of Section 11, consider, besides the matters mentioned in clauses 

(a) to (d) of sub-section (3) of section 11, the end use of the mineral by the 

applicant.] 

 

36. Boundaries below the surface :- The boundaries of the area covered   

by a mining lease shall run vertically downwards below the surface  towards the 

centre of the earth. 

 

37. Transfer of lease :-  (1) The lessee shall not, without the previous 

consent in writing of the State Government and in the case  of mining lease in 

respect of any mineral specified in 
4
[Part ‘A’ and Part ‘B’ of] the First  Schedule 

to the Act, without the previous approval of the Central Government :- 

 

(a) assign, sublet, mortgage, or in any other manner, transfer the 
mining lease, or any right, title or interest therein, or  

(b) enter into or make any 5[bonafide] arrangement, contract, or 
understanding whereby the lessee will or may be directly or  

indirectly financed to a substantial extent by, or under   which the 

lessee's operations or undertakings will  or  may  be  substantially 

controlled by, any person or body of persons  other than the lessee:   

__________________________________________________________________ 
1.Substituted by  G.S.R.56 (E), dated 17.1.2000.   2.Ibid. 3.Substituted by  G.S.R.56 (E),        
dated 17.1.2000.     4.Inserted by  G.S.R.56 (E), dated 17.1.2000.  5.Ibid. 



 38 

 

 

             (Omitted.) 

Provided further that where the mortgagee is an institution or a  Bank or a 

Corporation specified in Schedule V, it shall not be  necessary for the lessee to 

obtain any such consent of the  State Government. 

 

 (1A) The State Government shall not give its consent to transfer of 

mining lease unless the transferee has accepted all the conditions  and liabilities 

which the transferor was having in respect of such  mining lease. 

 

(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-rule (1) the lessee may, 
1
[  ] 

transfer his lease or any right, title or interest therein to a  person who has filed an 

affidavit stating that he has filed an up-to-date income-tax returns, paid the 

income tax assessed on him and paid the income tax on the basis of self-

assessment as provided in  the Income Tax Act, 1961( 43 of 1961), on payment of 

a fee of five  hundred rupees to the State Government : 

 

Provided that the lessee shall make available to the transferee the  original 

or certified copies of all plans of abandoned workings in   the area and in a belt 65 

metres wide surrounding it; 

 

Provided further that where the mortgagee is an institution or a Bank  or a 

Corporation specified in Schedule V, it shall not be necessary   for any such 

institution or Bank or Corporation to meet with the  requirement relating to 

income tax; 

 

Provided further that the lessee shall not charge or accept from the 

transferee any premium in addition to the sum spent by him, in  obtaining the 

lease, and for conducting all or any of the operations   referred to in rule 30 in or 

over the land leased to him. 
 

2
[ Omitted.] 

 

(3) The State Government may, by order in writing determine any   lease 

at any time if the lessee has, in the opinion of the State Government, committed a 

breach of any of the provisions of sub-rule   (1) or sub-rule (1A) or has transferred 

any lease or any right, title, or interest therein otherwise than in accordance with 

sub-rule  (2) : 

 

Provided that no such order shall be made without giving the lessee a 

reasonable opportunity of stating his case. 

 

__________________________________________________________________ 
1. Omitted by  G.S.R.743 (E), dated 25.9.2000. 2. Omitted by  G.S.R.56 (E), dated 17.1.2000   

 



 39 

37A. Transfer of lease to be executed within three months :- Where  on 

an application for transfer of mining lease under rule 37, the  State Government 

have given consent for transfer of such lease, a  transfer lease deed in Form O, or 

a form as near thereto as  possible, shall be executed within three months of the 

date of the  consent, or within such further period as the State Government may   

allow in this behalf. 

 
1
[38. Amalgamation of leases :- The State Government may , in the 

interest of mineral development and with reasons to be recorded in writing, permit 

amalgamation of two or more adjoining leases held by a lessee : 

 

Provided that the period of amalgamated leases shall be co-terminus with 

the lease whose period will expire first; 

 

Provided further that prior approval of the Central Government shall be 

required for such amalgamation in respect of leases for minerals specified in Part 

‘A’ and Part ‘B’ of the First Schedule to the Act.] 

 
2
[39. Pending applications for transfer and amalgamation :- An 

application for the  transfer  of a mining lease or the amalgamation of mining 

leases pending at the commencement of these rules shall be disposed of in 

accordance with these rules.] 
 

            40. Registers :- (1) A register of applications for mining leases shall be 

maintained by the State Government in Form L.  

 

(2) A register of mining leases shall be maintained by the State Government in 
Form-M.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

__________________________________________________________________ 
1.  Substituted by G.S.R.56 (E), dated 17.1.2000.   2.  Ibid.  



 40 

CHAPTER V 

 
Procedure for obtaining a Prospecting Licence or Mining Lease in 

respect of Land in which the Minerals vest in a person 

other than the Government 

 

41. Applicability of this chapter :- The provisions of this chapter shall 

apply only to the grant of prospecting licences and mining  leases in respect of 

land in which the minerals vest exclusively in  a person other than the 

Government .  
 

42. Restrictions on the grant of prospecting licence and mining  lease:- 

(1) No prospecting licence or mining lease shall be granted to any person  
unless he has filed an affidavit stating that he has– 
 

(i) filed up-to-date income tax returns; 
(ii) paid the income tax assessed on him, and  
(iii) paid the income tax on the basis of self-assessment as provided in 

the Income Tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961). 

 

(2) Except  with  the  previous  approval   of the  Central  Government, no   
 prospecting licence or mining lease shall be granted in respect of  any mineral 

specified in the First Schedule to the Act. 
 

43. Renewal of prospecting licence :– Omitted. 

 

44. Conditions of prospecting licence : - Every prospecting licence  shall 

be subject to the following conditions :- 

 

     (i) the licensee shall pay the grantor such prospecting fee as may be 

agreed upon, 
1
[being not less than one rupee and not more than ten rupees] per 

hectare of the land covered by the licence for each year or a part of the year of the 

period for which a licence is granted or renewed; 

 

     (ii) in the case of minerals other than gold, silver, precious stones or  

mica, the licensee shall not win or carry away the minerals for commercial 

purposes :  

 

Provided that the licensee may win or carry away for purposes other than  

commercial purposes - 

 

(a) any quantity of such minerals within the limits specified in 
Schedule III  without any payment; 

(b) any  quantity of  such minerals  exceeding  such  limits but    
 not  exceeding  twice  such  limits,  which  is  won  during 

__________________________________________________________________ 
1. Substituted by G.S.R.21 (E), dated 11.1.2002 



 41 

      prospecting operations, on payment of royalty for the time    
      being specified in the Second Schedule to the Act in respect    
      of those minerals; 
 

(c) any  quantity  of  limestone not  exceeding  500  tonnes  for   

testing its use in any industry specified by the Central 

Government in this behalf, on payment of royalty for the  

time being specified in the Second Schedule to the Act in  

respect of limestone ; 

 

      (iii) in the case of gold, silver, precious stones or mica the licensee 

may carry away any quantity won during the course of  prospecting operations on 

payment of royalty for the time being  specified in the Second Schedule to the Act 

in respect of such mineral; 

 

     (iv) such other conditions as may be agreed upon between the parties  

not being inconsistent with the provisions of the Act or  these rules. 

 

45. Conditions of mining lease : -  Every mining lease shall be subject to 

the following conditions :- 

 

            (i) the provisions of clauses (b) to (l) and (p) to (u) of sub-rule (1) of rule 

27 shall apply to such leases with the modification that in clauses (c) and (d) for 

the words "State Government " the word "lessor" shall be substituted ; 

 

(ia) mining operations shall be undertaken in accordance with  the duly 

approved mining plan ; 

 

(ii) 1[ Omitted.]; 
 

(iii) the lease may contain such other conditions, not being inconsistent 

with the provisions of the Act and these rules, as may be agreed upon between the 

parties; 

 

            (iv) if the lessee makes any default in payment of royalty as required by 

section 9 or commits a breach of any of the  conditions of the lease, the lessor 

shall give notice to the  lessee requiring him to pay the royalty or remedy the 

breach, as the case may be, within sixty days from the date of the receipt  of the 

notice and if the royalty is not paid or the breach is  not remedied within such 

period, the lessor without prejudice to any proceeding that may be taken against 

the lessee determine  the lease; 

 

(v) the lessee may determine the lease at any time by giving not less than 

one year’s notice in writing to lessor. 

 
1. Omitted by G.S.R. 21 (E), dated 11.1.2002. 

 



 42 

46. Transfer or assignment :-  (1) No prospecting licence or mining lease 

or  any  right, title or  interest  in such  licence  or lease shall  be  transferred  to  a 

person unless he has filed an affidavit stating that he has filed an up-to-date 

income tax return, paid the income tax assessed on him and paid the income tax 

on the basis of self-assessment as provided in the Income Tax Act, 1961( 43 of 

1961). 

 

(2) No prospecting licence or mining lease or any right, title or interest in 

such licence or lease in respect of any mineral  specified in the First Schedule to 

the Act shall be transferred  except with the previous approval of the Central 

Government. 

 

47. Submission of copy of licence or lease : - Every person obtaining  a 

prospecting licence or a mining lease shall, within three months  of the grant of 

such licence or lease, submit to the State  Government concerned a certified copy 

of the licence or lease in duplicate. 

 

48. Communication of transfer or assignment :- Every transferee or 

assignee of a prospecting licence or a mining lease or of any right, title or interest 

therein, shall, within one month of such transfer  or assignment, inform the State 

Government of the transfer or assignment and of the terms and conditions of such 

transfer or assignment. 

 

  49. Prohibition of premium :- No person granting or transferring a  

prospecting licence or any right, title or interest in any such  licence or lease shall 

charge or pay any premium in addition to, or  in lieu of the prospecting fee, 

surface rent, dead rent or royalty  payable under the Act or such proportionate part 

of such fee, rent or royalty as is payable in respect of such right, title, or interest. 

 

50. Prohibition of working of mines : - If the State Government has 

reason to believe that the grant or transfer of a prospecting  licence or a mining 

lease or  of any right, title or interest in such  licence or lease is in contravention 

of any of the provisions of   this chapter, the State Government may, after giving 

the parties an opportunity to represent their views and with the approval of the  

Central Government, direct the parties concerned not to undertake  any 

prospecting or mining operations in the area to which the licence or lease relates. 

 

51. Returns and Statements : - The holder of a prospecting licence or a 

mining lease shall furnish to the State Government such returns and statements 

and within such period as may be specified by it. 

 

52. Penalty : - (1) If the holder of a prospecting licence or a mining lease 

or his transferee or assignee fails, without sufficient cause, to furnish the 

documents or information, or returns referred to in  rule 46, rule 47, rule 48, or 

rule 51, or acts in any manner in  contravention of rule 49 or rule 50, he shall be 



 43 

punishable with  imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or fine 

which  may extend to five thousand rupees or with both. 

 

            (2) If any person grants or transfers or obtains a prospecting  licence or 

mining lease or any right, title or interest therein, in contravention of any of the 

provisions of this chapter, he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may 

extend to one year or  fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or both. 
               

 



 44 

CHAPTER VI 

 
Grant of Prospecting Licences and Mining Leases in respect of Land  

 in which the Minerals vest partly in the Government and  

partly in  private persons. 

 

 

53. Chapters III and IV to apply to prospecting licences and mining 

leases in respect of minerals which vest partly in Government and  partly in 

private persons : - The provisions of chapters III and IV   shall apply in relation 

to  the grant  of   prospecting  licences  and   mining leases  in  respect of minerals  

which vest partly in the Government and partly in a private person as they apply 

in relation to the grant of prospecting licences and mining leases in respect of 

minerals  which vest exclusively in the Government : 

 

Provided that the dead rent and royalty payable in respect of  mineral 

which partly vest in the Government and partly in a private person shall be shared 

by the Government and by that  person in   proportion to the shares they have in 

the minerals. 

               



 45 

CHAPTER VII 
 

Revision 

 

54. Application for revision : - (1) Any person aggrieved by any order             

made by the State Government or other authority in exercise of the  powers 

conferred on it by the Act or these rules may, within three months of the date of 

communication of the order to him, apply to the Central Government in triplicate 

in Form N for revision of the order. The application should be accompanied by a 

Bank Draft for 
1
[five thousand rupees] on a nationalised bank in the name of 'Pay 

and Accounts Officer, Department of Mines' payable at New Delhi or through a 

treasury challan for 
1
[five thousand rupees] under the Head of Account - 0853 - 

Non-ferrous Mining and Metallurgical Industries -102 Mineral Concession Fees, 

Rents and Royalties : 

 

Provided that any such application may be entertained after the said period 

of three months if the applicant satisfies the Central Government that he had 

sufficient cause for not making the application within time. 

 

 
2
[(1A)  Omitted.] 

 

(2) In every application under sub-rule (1) against the order of a State 

Government refusing to grant a prospecting licence or a mining lease, any person 

to whom a prospecting licence or  mining lease was granted in respect of the same 

area or for a part thereof, shall be impleaded as party. 

 

(3) Along with the application under sub-rule (1), the applicant shall 

submit as many copies thereof as there are parties impleaded  under sub-rule (2). 

 

(4) On receipt of the application and the copies thereof, the Central          

Government shall send a copy of the application to each of the parties impleaded 

under sub-rule (2) specifying a date on or before which he may make his 

representations, if any, against the revision application. 

 

55. Orders on revision application : - (1) On receipt of an application for 

revision under rule 54, copies thereof shall be sent to the State Government or 

other authority and to all the impleaded parties calling upon them to make such 

comments as they may like to make within three months from the date of issue of 

the communication, and the State Government or other authority and the             

impleaded parties, while furnishing comments to the Central Government shall 

simultaneously endorse a copy of the comments to the other parties. 

 

(2) Comments received from any party under sub-rule (1) shall be sent             

to the other parties for making such further comments as they may like to make 

within  one  month  from  the  date of issue of  the  communication and the parties  
_______________________________________________________________________________ 

1. Substituted by G.S.R. 21 (E), dated 11.1.2002.      2.Omitted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000. 



 46 

making further comments shall send them to all the other parties. 

 

(3) The revision application, the communications containing comments             

and counter-comments referred to in sub-rule (1) and (2) shall constitute the 

records of the case. 

 

            (4) After considering the records referred to in sub-rule (3), the Central 

Government may confirm, modify or set aside the order or pass such other order 

in relation thereto as the Central Government may deem just and proper. 

 

(5) Pending  the  final  disposal  of  an application for revision, the Central  

Government may, for sufficient cause, stay the execution of the order against  

which any revision application has been made. 

 
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 47 

CHAPTER VIII 
 

Miscellaneous 

 

56. Power to rectify apparent mistakes: - Any clerical or arithmetical 

mistake in any order passed by the Government or any other authority or officer 

under these rules and any error arising therein from accidental slip or omission, 

may, within two years from the date of the order, be corrected by the 

Government, authority or officer, as the case may be: 

 

Provided that no order prejudicial to any person shall be passed unless he 

has been given a reasonable opportunity for stating his case. 

 

57. Copies of licences and leases and annual returns to be supplied to 

Government : - (1) A copy of every 
1
[reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence 

and mining lease] granted or renewed under these rules shall be supplied by each             

State Government within two months of such grant or renewal to the Controller 

General, Indian Bureau of Mines and the 
2
[Director General, Mines Safety]. 

 

 (2) A consolidated annual return of all 
3
[reconnaissance permits,            

prospecting licences and mining leases] granted or renewed under these rules 

shall also be supplied by each State Government to the Controller General, Indian 

Bureau of Mines in such form as may be specified by him, not later than the 30th 

day of June following the year to which the return relates. A copy of such return 

shall also be supplied by the State Government to the 
4
[Director General, Mines 

Safety ] at the same time. 

 

(3) Every State Government shall send copies of all returns received by it 

under sub-rule (1) of rule 19 and clause (i) of sub-rule (1) of rule 27 to the 

Controller General, Indian Bureau of Mines. 

 

58.Reservation of areas for exploitation in the public sector, etc.;-    

    (Omitted.) 

 

59. Availability of area for regrant to be notified :-  
5
[(1)  No  area – 

 

(a) which was previously held or which is being held under a 
reconnaissance permit or a prospecting licence or a mining 

lease ; or  
 

(b) which has been reserved by the Government or any local 
authority for any purpose other than mining ; or 

 

(c) in respect of which the order granting a permit or licence or  
lease  has been  revoked  under  sub-rule (1) of  rule 7A or sub- 

__________________________________________________________________ 
1.Substituted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000           2.Ibid.      3.Ibid.       4.Ibid.      5.Ibid. 



 48 

                 

rule (1) of rule 15 or sub-rule (1) of rule 31, as the case may be; 

or  

 

(d) in respect of which a notification has been issued under the 
sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) of section 17; or 

 

(e) which  has  been  reserved  by  the  State Government  or under  
section 17A of the Act; 

 

shall be available for grant unless – 

 

(i) an entry to the effect that the area is available for grant is made in the 
register referred to in sub-rule (2) of rule 7D or sub-rule (2) of rule 21 

or sub-rule (2) of rule 40 as the case may be; and 

 

(ii) the  availability of the area  for grant is  notified in the Official Gazette   

and specifying a date (being a date not earlier than thirty days from the             

date of the publication of such notification in the Official Gazette)              

from which such area shall be available for grant: 

 

Provided that nothing in this rule shall apply to the renewal of a lease in 

favour of the original lessee or his legal heirs notwithstanding the fact that the 

lease has already expired : 

 

            Provided further that where an area reserved under rule 58 or under 

section 17A of the Act is proposed to be granted to a Government Company, no 

notification under clause (ii) shall be required to be issued : 

 

            Provided also that where an area held under a reconnaissance permit,             

or a prospecting licence, as the case may be, is granted in terms of sub-section (1) 

of section 11, no notification under clause (ii) shall be required to be issued.] 

 

(2) The  Central Government  may, for  reasons  to be recorded  in  writing  

relax the provisions of sub-rule (1) in any special case. 

 

60. Premature applications :- Applications for the grant of a         
1
[reconnaissance permit,  prospecting licence or mining lease] in respect of areas 

whose availability for grant is required to be notified under rule 59 shall, if – 

 

(a) no notification has been issued, under that rule; or 
 

2
[(b) where any such notification has been issued, the period   

    specified in the notification has not expired, shall be  

deemed to be premature and shall not be entertained.] 

 

1.Substituted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000                                       2.Ibid 



 49 

1
[61. Lessor to supply certain information to the lessee :- Where any 

area has previously been held under a reconnaissance permit or prospecting 

licence  or  mining lease,  the  person who was granted such  permit  or licence  or 

lease shall make available to the new permit holder or licensee or lessee the 

original or certified copies of all plans of abandoned workings in that area and in 

a belt preferably 60 metres surrounding it.] 

 

62. Change of name, nationality, etc. to be intimated :- (1) An applicant 

for, or the holder of a 
2
[reconnaissance permit, a prospecting licence or a mining 

lease] shall intimate to the State Government within sixty days any change that 

may take place in his name, nationality or other particulars mentioned in the 

relevant Forms. 

 
3
[(2) If the holder of a reconnaissance permit or a prospecting licence or a 

mining lease fails, without sufficient cause, to furnish the information referred to 

in sub-rule (1), the State Government may determine the reconnaissance permit or 

prospecting licence or mining lease, as the case may be] : 

 

Provided that no such order shall be made without giving the 
4
[permit 

holder or the licensee or the lessee], as the case may be, a reasonable opportunity 

of stating his case.  

 

63. Previous approval of the Central Government to be obtained             

through State Government :- Where in any case previous approval of the 

Central Government is required under the Act or these rules, the application for 

such approval shall be made to the Central Government through the State 

Government . 

 
5
[63A. The State Government shall dispose of the application for grant of 

reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining lease in the following 

period: 

 

a) Reconnaissance Permit -  within six months from the date of receipt of the 
       application for reconnaissance permit under rule 4A. 

 

b) Prospecting Licence -  within nine months from the date of receipt of the 
application for prospecting licence under rule 10. 

 

c) Mining Lease -  within twelve months from the date of receipt of the 
application for mining lease under rule 22: 

 

       Provided that the aforesaid periods shall be applicable only if the application 

for  reconnaissance  permit,  prospecting licence  or  mining lease, as the case may 

be, is complete in all respects;   

_________________________________________________________________ 
1. Substituted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000             2.  Ibid.          3.  Ibid.          4.  Ibid. 

5. Inserted by G.S.R. 21 (E), dated 11.1.2002 



 50 

   

         Provided   further  that  the  disposal  by the  State  Government in case of  

minerals listed in the First Schedule to the Act shall mean either recommendation 

to the Central Government for grant of the mineral concession, or refusal to grant 

the mineral concession by the State Government under rule 5 for reconnaissance 

permit, rule 12 for prospecting licence and rule 26 for mining lease, and in all 

other cases, disposal shall mean either intimation regarding grant of precise area, 

or refusal to grant the mineral concession under rule 5  for reconnaissance permit, 

rule 12 for prospecting licence and rule 26 for mining lease; 

 

Provided also that in case the State Government is not able to dispose of 

the application for grant of reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining 

lease within the period as specified above, the reasons for the delay shall be given 

in writing.] 

 

64. How the fees and deposit to be made :- Any amount payable under  

the Act or these rules except that payable in respect of revision petition under sub-

rule (1) of rule 54, shall be paid in such manner as the State Government may 

specify in this behalf. 

 

64A. The State Government may, without prejudice to the provisions             

contained in the Act or any other rule in these rules, charge simple interest at the 

rate of twenty four percent per annum on any rent, royalty or fee (other than the 

fee payable under sub-rule (1) of rule 54) or other sum due to that Government 

under the Act or these rules or under the terms and conditions of any prospecting  

licence or mining lease from the sixtieth day of the expiry of the date fixed by that 

Government for payment of such royalty, rent, fee or other sum and until payment 

of such royalty, rent, fee or other sum is made. 
 

1
[64B.Charging of Royalty in case of minerals subjected to processing: 

 

(1) In  case  processing  of  run-of-mine  mineral  is carried out  within  the 

leased area, then , royalty shall be chargeable on the processed mineral removed 

from the leased area. 

 

(2) In  case  run-of-mine  mineral  is  removed  from  the  leased area  to  a 

processing plant which is located outside the leased area, then, royalty shall be 

chargeable on the unprocessed run-of-mine mineral and not on the processed 

product. 

 

64C.  Royalty on tailings or rejects :-  On  removal of  tailings or  rejects 

from the leased area for dumping and not for sale or  consumption, outside leased 

area such tailings or rejects shall not be liable for payment of royalty: 

__________________________________________________________________ 
1.Inserted by G.S.R. 743 (E), dated 25.9.2000. 

 

 



 51 

Provided that in case so dumped tailings or rejects are used for sale or 

consumption on any later date after the date of such dumping, then, such tailings 

or rejects shall be liable for payment of royalty.] 

 
1
[64 D. Manner of payment of royalty on minerals on ad valorem basis: 

 

(1) Every mine owner, his agent, manager, employee, contractor or sub-lessee 

shall compute the amount of royalty on minerals where such royalty is charged  

on ad valorem basis as follows: 

 

(i) for all non-atomic and non fuel minerals sold in the domestic market or 

consumed in captive plants or exported by the mine owners (other than bauxite 

and laterite  despatched for use in alumina and metallurgical industries, copper, 

lead, zinc, tin, nickel, gold, silver and minerals specified under Atomic Energy 

Act), the State-wise sale prices for different minerals as published by Indian 

Bureau of Mines shall be the sale price for computation of royalty in respect of 

any mineral produced any time during a month in any mine in that State, and the 

royalty shall be computed as per the formula given below: 

 

Royalty = Sale price of mineral (grade wise and State-wise)  

published by IBM X Rate of royalty (in percentage) X Total  

quantity of mineral grade produced/ dispatched: 

 

Provided that if for a particular mineral, the information for a State for a 

particular month is not published by the Indian Bureau of Mines, the latest 

information available for that mineral in the State shall be referred, failing which 

the latest information for All India for the mineral shall be referred. 

 

(ii) for the grades of minerals produced for captive consumption (other than 

bauxite and laterite despatched for use in alumina and metallurgical industries, 

copper, lead, zinc, tin, nickel, gold and silver) and those not despatched for sale in 

domestic market or export, the sale price published by the Indian Bureau of Mines 

shall be used as the benchmark price for computation of royalty. 

 

(iii) for primary gold, silver, copper, nickel, tin, lead and zinc, the total 

contained metal in the ore or concentrate produced during the period for which 

the royalty is computed and reported in the statutory monthly returns under 

Mineral Conservation and Development Rules, 1988 or  recorded  in  the books of 

the mine owners shall be considered for the purposes of computing the royalty in 

the first place and then the royalty shall be computed as the percentage of the 

average metal prices published by the Indian Bureau of Mines for primary gold, 

silver, copper, nickel, tin, lead and zinc during the period of computation of 

royalty as follows: 
 

1.  Substituted by G.S.R 883(E) dated 10.12.2009 

 



 52 

Royalty = sale price X  rate of royalty in percentage 

 

where sale price = Average price of metal as published by Indian Bureau of Mines 

during the month X Total contained metal in ore or concentrate produced X 

Rupee or  Dollar exchange rate selling as on the last date of the month of 

computation of royalty: 

 

 

Provided that in case of by-product gold and silver the royalty shall be 

based on the total quantity of metal produced and such royalty shall be calculated 

as follows: 

 

Royalty = Sale price X rate of royalty in percentage 

 

Explanation - For the purpose of this sub-clause sale price means, average price of 

metal as published by Indian Bureau of Mines during the month X Total by-

product metal actually produced X Rupee or Dollar Exchange rate selling as on 

the last date of the month of computation of royalty. 

 

(iv) For bauxite or laterite ore despatched for use in alumina and aluminium 

metal extraction or despatched to alumina or aluminium metal extraction industry 

within India, the total contained alumina in the bauxite or laterite ore on dry basis 

produced during the period for which the royalty is computed and reported in the 

statutory monthly returns under Mineral Conservation and Development Rules, 

1988 or recorded in the books of the mine owners shall be considered for the 

purpose of computing the royalty in the first place and then the royalty shall be 

computed as the percentage of the average monthly price for the contained 

aluminium metal in the said alumina content of the ore published by the Indian 

Bureau of Mines, on the following basis namely:- 

 

Royalty = 

 
 

52.9 

100 

 

X 

 

Percentage of 

Al2O3 in the 

bauxite on dry 

basis (as 

reported in the 

Statutory 

Monthly return 

under MCDR) 

 

X 

 

Average 

monthly price 

of aluminium 

as published 

by the IBM 

 

X 

 

Rupee/ dollar 

exchange rate 

(selling) as on 

the last date 

of the period 

of the 

computation 

of royalty 

 

X 

 

Rate of  

royalty (in 

percentage) 

  
 

Provided that for computing the royalty for bauxite or laterite despatched 

for end use other than alumina and aluminium metal extraction and for exports 

provisions of this clause shall not apply. 

 



 53 

(2) In case of metallic ores based on metal contained in ore and metal prices 

based on benchmark prices, the royalty shall be charged on dry basis, and the 

mine owner shall establish suitable facilities for collection of sample and its 

analysis on dry basis at the mine site."] 

 

 

65. Facilities for training of students :- (1) Every owner, agent or            

manager of a mine shall permit students of mining and geological institutions 

approved by the Central Government to acquire practical training of the mines 

and plants operated by them and provide all necessary facilities required for the 

training of such students. 

 

(2) Applications for training from students of institutions teaching mining 

or geology should be forwarded to the owner, agent or manager of a mine through 

the Principal or Head of the Institution. Cases of refusal to provide facilities for 

practical training by any owner, agent or manager of a mine should be referred to 

the Controller General, Indian Bureau of Mines. 

 

66. Geophysical data to be supplied to the Geological Survey of India 

and the Department of Atomic Energy :- (1) A 
1
[permit holder or licensee or 

lessee] shall furnish - 

             

(a) all geophysical data relating to prospecting/ mining fields or 
engineering and ground water surveys, such as anomaly maps, 

sections, plans, structures, contour maps, logging collected by         

him during  the  course of  
2
[reconnaissance or  prospecting or         

mining] operations to the Director General, Geological Survey of  

India, Calcutta and  the Director of  Geology   and   Mining  of   the   

State  in   which   the 
2
[reconnaissance or prospecting or mining] 

operations are carried on. 

 

(b) all information pertaining to investigations of atomic minerals 
collected by him during the course of 

3
[reconnaissance or prospecting 

or mining] operations to the 
4
[Director, Atomic Minerals Directorate 

for Exploration and Research, Hyderabad], and to the Director of 

Geology and Mining of the State, in which the 
3
[reconnaissance or 

prospecting or mining] operations are carried on. 

 

(2) Data or information referred to in sub-rule (1) shall be furnished every 

year reckoned from the date of commencement of the period of the 
5
[reconnaissance permit or prospecting licence or mining] lease. 

 
_______________________________________________________________________________ 

1. Substituted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17. 1.2000. 2. Ibid.. 3.  Ibid.  4. Ibid. 5. Ibid 

 

    

 



 54 

 

66 A. 
1
[Special provisions relating to atomic minerals: (1) 

Notwithstanding  anything  contained in the rules, the  prospecting  or mining 

operations in respect of the atomic minerals listed in Part-B of the  First Schedule 

of the Act shall be subject to following conditions:-  

 

(i)  if  the  holder of  prospecting  licence or mining lease discovers any 

atomic mineral in the area granted under licence or lease, not specified in 

the licence or lease, discovery of such mineral shall also be reported to the 

Director, Atomic Minerals Directorate for  Exploration and Research, 

Hyderabad within  60 days from the date of discovery of such mineral; 

 

(ii) the licensee or lessee shall not win or dispose of such atomic mineral 

unless such atomic mineral is included in licence or lease or a separate 

licence or lease for the purpose has been obtained; 

 

(iii)
 

the quantities of atomic minerals recovered incidental to such 

prospecting / mining operations shall be collected and stacked separately 

and a report to that effect shall be sent to the Secretary, Department of 

Atomic Energy, Mumbai and the Director, Atomic Minerals Directorate 

for Exploration and Research, Hyderabad every three months for such 

further action by the licensee or lessee as may be directed by the Atomic 

Minerals Directorate for Exploration and Research or the Department of 

Atomic Energy. 

 

(2) The licensee or lessee referred to in sub-rule(1) shall, within the period 

referred to therein, apply to the Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy, 

Mumbai through the State Government, for grant of a licence to handle the said 

atomic minerals under the provisions of the Atomic Energy Act,1962 (33 of 1962) 

and the Department of Atomic Energy shall intimate the state Government 

regarding issue of licence: 

 

Provided that if in the opinion of the  Department of Atomic Energy the 

atomic mineral/minerals recovered incidentally to such prospecting/mining 

operations is not of economically exploitable grade or the quantity found is 

insignificant, it may advise the State Government to exempt the licensee/lessee 

from obtaining a separate licence or lease for/or inclusion of the atomic minerals 

under these Rules.] 

 

 

__________________________________________________________________ 
1. Substituted by G.S.R.280(E), dated 5.5.2005   
 

 

 

 
 



 55 

67. Lease period :- Where more than one mineral is found in an area  and 

lease is granted for exploiting two or more minerals, the periods of lease for all 

minerals shall be co-terminus with that for which the first lease was originally 

granted. 
 

 

68. Repeal :- On the commencement of these rules, the Mineral 

Concession Rules, 1949, shall cease to be in force, except as regards things, done 

or omitted to be done before such commencement. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 56 

CHAPTER IX 
 

69.  Associated minerals :- The following shall be the group of associated 

minerals for the purposes of section 6 of the Act namely:- 

 

(i) Apatite, Beryl, Cassiterite, Columbite, Emerald, Felspar,  

Lepidolite, Mica, Pitchblende, Quartz, Samarskite.  Scheelite, 

Topaz, Tantalite, Tourmaline. 

 

(ii) Iron, Manganese, Titanium, Vanadium and Nickel minerals. 

 

(iii) Lead, Zinc, Copper, Cadmium, Arsenic, Antimony, Bismuth,  

Cobalt, Nickel, Molybdenum and Uranium minerals, and Gold and  

Silver, Arsenopyrite, Chalcopyrite, Pyrite, Pyrrhotite and  

Pentlandite. 

 

(iv) Chromium, Osmiridium, Platinum and Nickel minerals 

 

(v) Kyanite, Sillimanite, Corundum, Dumortierite and Topaz. 

 

(vi) Gold, Silver, Tellurium, Selenium and Pyrite. 

 

(vii) Barytes, Fluorite, Chalcocite, Selenium and minerals of Zinc, Lead 

and Silver. 

 

(viii) Tin and Tungsten minerals.  
 

(ix) Limestone, Dolomite and Magnesite.  
 

(x) Ilmenite, Monazite, Zircon, Rutile, 1[Leucoxene], Garnet and 
Sillimanite.  

 

(xi) Sulphides of copper and iron.  
 

(xii) Coal, Fireclay and Shale.  
 

(xiii) Magnetite and Apatite.  
 

(xiv) Magnesite and Chromite.  
 

(xv) Talc (Soapstone and Steatite) and Dolomite.  
 

(xvi) Celesite, Phosphatic Nodules, Clay and Gypsum.  
 

__________________________________________________________________
1.Inserted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000. 

 



 57 

70.  Sand  not  be  treated  as  minor  mineral  when   used  for certain 

purposes : - Sand shall not be treated as a minor mineral when used for any of the 

following purposes, namely:- 

 

(i) purposes of refractory and manufacture of ceramic;  

(ii) metallurgical purposes;  

(iii) optical purposes;  

(iv)  purposes of stowing in coal mines; 

(v) for manufacture  of silvicrete cement;  

(vi) for manufacture of sodium silicate;  

(vii) for manufacture of pottery and glass.  

 

71. 
1
[Omitted. ] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

__________________________________________________________________
1.. Omitted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000. 

 

               

    



 58 

CHAPTER X 
             

72. Payment of compensation to owner of surface rights etc: - 
1
[(1) The 

holder of a reconnaissance permit or prospecting licence  or mining lease shall be 

liable to pay to the occupier of the surface of the land over which he holds the 

reconnaissance permit or prospecting licence or mining lease, as the case may be,  

such annual compensation as may be determined by an officer appointed by the 

State Government by notification in this behalf in the manner provided in sub-

rules (2) to (4).] 

 

(2) In the case of agricultural land, the amount of annual compensation 

shall be worked out on the basis of the average annual net income from the 

cultivation of similar land for the previous three years. 

 

(3) In the case of non-agricultural land, the amount of annual 

compensation shall be worked out on the basis of average annual letting value of 

similar land for the previous three years. 

 

(4) The  annual  compensation  referred to in sub-rule (1) shall be payable  

on or before such date as may be specified by the State Government in this behalf. 

 

73. Assessment of compensation for damage :- 
2
[(1) After the 

termination of a reconnaissance permit or a prospecting licence or a mining lease, 

the State Government shall assess the damage, if any, done to the land by the 

reconnaissance or prospecting or mining operations and shall determine the 

amount of compensation payable by the permit holder or licensee or the lessee as 

the case may be,  to the occupier of the surface land.] 

 

(2) Every such assessment shall be made within a period of one year from 

the date of termination of the 
3
[reconnaissance permit or prospecting licence or 

mining lease] and shall be carried out by an officer appointed by the State 

Government by notification in this behalf. 

 

74. Issue of notification where prospecting operations are to be 

undertaken by the Geological Survey of India etc.:- (1) Where a prospecting 

operation is to be undertaken by the Geological Survey of India, the Indian 

Bureau of Mines, the Atomic Minerals Division of the Department of Atomic 

Energy of the Central Government, the Directorate of Mining and Geology of any 

State Government (by whatever name called), or the Mineral Exploration             

Corporation Limited, the State Government shall issue a notification in the 

Official Gazette giving details of the area, and the period for which prospecting 

operations are to be undertaken. 

__________________________________________________________________
1.Substituted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000. 

2.Ibid.    

3.Ibid. 



 59 

(2) The State Government shall not grant any prospecting licence or 

mining lease to any other person for an area or a part thereof in relation to which a 

notification has been issued under sub-rule (1). 

 

(3) The State Government may revoke a notification issued under sub-rule 

(1), if the prospecting operations have been completed before the expiry of the 

period stated in the notification. 

 

75.Prospecting or mining operation by State Governments:- (1) Where  

a State Government proposes to undertake prospecting or mining operations of 

any mineral, it shall issue a notification in the Official Gazette giving details of 

the area and the period for which such operations are proposed to be undertaken: 

 
1
[Provided that if the State Government fails to undertake prospecting or 

mining operation within the period mentioned in the notification, the notification 

so issued shall lapse at the expiry of the said period unless the period is extended 

by a fresh notification.] 

 
2
[(2) Omitted.] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

__________________________________________________________________
1.Inserted by G.S.R. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000. 

2.Omitted by G.S.R. 9  (E), dated 4.1.1999. 



60 
 

 

 

 

SCHEDULE  I 

[See rule 2(ii)] 
1
[INDEX 

 

1. Application for Reconnaissance Permit    Form A 

 

2. Application for Prospecting Licence    Form B 

 

3. Receipt of applications for Prospecting Licence/   Form D 

    Mining Lease or renewals 

 

4. Receipt of application for Reconnaissance Permit   Form D-1 

     

5. Application for renewal of Prospecting Licence   Form E 

 

6. Prospecting Licence Deed      Form F 

 

7. Reconnaissance Permit Deed     Form F-1 

 

8. Register of applications for Prospecting Licences   Form G 

 

9. Register of applications for Reconnaissance Permits  Form G-1 

 

10. Register of Prospecting Licences     Form H 

 

11. Register of Reconnaissance Permits    Form H-1 

 

12. Application for Mining Lease     Form I 

 

13. Application for renewal of Mining Lease    Form J 

 

14. Mining Lease Deed      Form K 

 

15. Register of applications for Mining Lease   Form L 

 

16. Register of Mining Leases     Form M 

 

17. Application for revision       Form N 

 

18. Model form for transfer of Mining Lease    Form O]  

 
2
[19. Model Form for transfer of Prospecting Licence  Form P]  

  

1. Substituted by G.S.R. No. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000. 
2. Inserted by G.S.R. No. 31 (E), dated 22.1.2001. 



61 
 

 

 
1[ FORM A 

 

"To be submitted in quadruplicate" 

Received 

at............ 

(place) on............... 

(Date) 

Initial of Receiving Officer 

 

GOVERNMENT OF............. 

 

(APPLICATION FOR RECONNAISSANCE PERMIT) 

( See rule 4 ) 

 

                                            Dated   day of    20…. 

To 

Through 

 

Sir, 

              I/We request that a reconnaissance permit under the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 be 

granted to me/us. 

 

2. A sum of Rs ……….. being the fee in respect of this application at the rate of Rs. 5/- per 

square kilometre or part thereof payable in accordance with the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 

has been deposited. 

 

3. The required particulars are given below:- 

 

 (i) Name of the applicant with complete address. 

(ii) Is the applicant a private individual/private company/public company/firm or  
 association? 

(iii) In case applicant is: 
(a) an individual, his nationality; 
(b) a company, an attested copy of the certificate of registration of the 

company shall be enclosed; 

(c) firm or association, the nationality of all the Partners of the firm or  
 members of the association; 

(iv) Profession or nature of business of applicant; 
(v) No. and date of the valid clearance certificate  of payment of mining dues   
 (copy attached); 

(vi) If on the date of application the applicant does not hold a reconnaissance

 permit, it should be stated whether an  affidavit to this effect has been  

 furnished to the satisfaction of the State government; 

 
1. Inserted by G.S.R.No.56 (E), dated 17.1.2000. 



62 
 

 

 

(vii)      Mineral or minerals which the applicant intends to prospect; 
(viii)      Period for which the reconnaissance permit is required; 
(ix)  Extent of the area the applicant wants to prospect; 

 (x)  Details of the area in respect of which reconnaissance permit is required : 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 

District                                    Taluq                                     Area 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 

 

 

  

(xi) Particulars of  the  areas  mineral-wise  within  the jurisdiction  of  the  State  
 Government for which the applicant or any person joint in interest with him; 

(a) already holds under reconnaissance permit; 
(b) has  already applied for but not granted; 
(c) being applied for simultaneously. 
 

 (xii)  Nature of joint  interest, if any; 

(xiii)     If the applicant intends to supervise the works, his previous experience of  
 reconnaissance, prospecting and mining operations should be explained; if  

he intends to appoint a manager, the name of such manager, his  

qualifications, nature and extent of his previous experience should be 

specified and his consent letter should be attached; 

 (xiv)  Financial resources of the applicant; 

(xv)     Particulars of receipted treasury challan attached for the amount referred to  
 at 2 above; 

(xvi)     The works proposed to be undertaken alongwith their physical annual  
 targets; 

(xvii)     The scheme of relinquishment of the area; 
(xviii)     Anticipated minimum annual expenditure (activity of workwise); 

 (xix)  Any other particulars or sketch map which the applicant wishes to furnish.  

 

 I/We do hereby declare that the particulars furnished above are correct and am/are 

ready to furnish any other details, including accurate plans as may be required by you. 

 

                                                                                Yours faithfully, 

 

 

 

(Signature and designation of the applicant) 

Place 

Date 

 

*The topographical map of 1" = 1 mile scale  
1
[ or 1 : 50,000] is obtainable from the office of the 

Survey of India, Hathibarkhala, Dehra Dun. 

______________________________________________________________________________ 
1. Inserted by G.S.R.No. 743 (E), dated 25.9.2000. 



63 
 

 

 

Detailed plan and topographical map are to be attached in quadruplicate with the original    

application.  

 

Note :  1.   If the application is signed by an authorised agent of the applicant, Power of  

  Attorney should be attached. 

 

            2.  The application should relate to one compact area only.] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



64 
 

 

 

 

 

FORM B 
 

"To be submitted in Triplicate" 

Received 

at............ 

(place) on............... 

(Date) 

Initial of Receiving Officer 

 

GOVERNMENT OF............. 

MODEL FORM 

Application for Prospecting Licence 

[See rule 9(1)] 

                                                 Dated   day of  20… 

To 

Through 

 

Sir, 

 

              I/We request that a prospecting licence under the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 be 

granted to me/us. 

 

 2.A sum of Rs………. being the fee in respect of this application at the rate of Rs.50 

for the first square kilometre or part thereof and Rs.10 for subsequent square kilometre or part 

thereof payable in accordance with Schedule II to the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 has been 

deposited. 

 

 3.The required particulars are given below:- 

 

 (i)  Name of the applicant with complete address. 

 (ii)  Is the applicant a private individual/private company/public company/firm or    

                      association? 

 (iii)  In case applicant is: 

     (a)  an individual, his nationality, 

  (b)  a company, an attested copy of the certificate of registration of the  

   company shall be enclosed, 

  (c)  Omitted, 

     (d) firm or association, the nationality of all the partners of the firm or 

members of the association. 

 (iv)  Profession or nature of business of applicant. 

 (v)  Omitted 

 

 



65 
 

 

 

 (via)  No. and date of the valid clearance certificate of payment of mining dues 

(copy attached). 

 (vib)  If on the date of application the applicant does not hold a prospecting 

licence, it should be stated whether an  affidavit to  this  effect  has  been  

furnished to the satisfaction of the State Government. 

 (vii)   Mineral or minerals which the applicant intends to prospect. 

                (viii)  Period for which the prospecting licence is required. 

                (ix)  Extent of the area the applicant wants to prospect. 

                (x)  Details of the area in respect of which prospecting licence is required. 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 

District     Taluq     Village      Khasra No.      Plot No.    Area 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 

 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 

 

 (X A)(a) Does the applicant have surface rights over the area for which he requires a 

                               prospecting licence? 

                         (b)  If not, has he obtained the consent of the owner, and the occupier  of  the 

land for undertaking prospecting operations. If so, the consent of the owner 

and the occupier obtained in writing be filed. 

               (xi)  Brief description of the area with Particular reference to the following: 

                          (a)  the situation of the area in respect to natural features such as streams etc. 

                          (b)  in the case of village, areas, the name of the village  and  if  only  a  part  of  

the village is applied for, the khasra number, the area in hectares of each 

field or part thereof applied for. 

 N.B. -  The areas shall cover whole or recognised part survey numbers.  

  

             (c)  In the case of forest areas, the name of the working circle, the range and the 

felling series. 

             (d)  For areas where no forest maps or cadestral maps are available, a sketch plan 

should be submitted on scale showing the area applied for together with 

boundary, if any, of any other existing mining lease or prospecting licence 

area if the area applied for has any common point or line with the boundaries 

of existing prospecting licence or mining lease areas. 

 (xii)  The areas applied for should be marked on plans as   detailed below: 

          (a) In case a cadestral map of the area is available, the area on this map should 

be marked showing the name of the village, Khasra number and area in 

hectares of each field and part thereof. 

 N.B. -  The area applied for shall cover whole survey numbers. 

 

          (b)  In the case of forest maps, the area should be marked on the map showing 

the range and felling series. 

 

          (c)  In case neither cadestral nor forest maps are available, the area should be 

marked on sketch plan drawn to scale showing on this plan all important 



66 
 

 

surface and natural features, the dimensions of the lines forming the 

boundary of the area and the bearing and distance of all corner points from 

any important, prominent and fixed point or points. 

 (xiii) An affidavit, that the up-to-date income tax returns, as prescribed under the 

Income Tax Act, 1961, have been filed, and tax due, including the tax on 

account of self-assessment has been paid. 

 (xiv) Particulars of the areas mineral-wise within the jurisdiction of the State 

Government for which the applicant or any person joint in interest with him: 

          (a) already holds under prospecting licence;  

          (b)  has already applied for but not granted; 

          (c)  being applied for simultaneously. 

 (xv)  Nature of joint in interest, if any. 

 (xvi)  If the applicant intends to supervise the works, his previous experience of 

prospecting and mining should be explained; If he intends to appoint a 

manager, the name of such manager, his qualifications, nature and extent of 

his previous experience should be specified and his consent letter should be 

attached. 

 (xvii)  Financial resources of the applicant. 

 (xviii)  Particulars of receipted treasury challan attached for the amount referred to 

at 2 above. 

 (xix)  Any other particulars or sketch map which the Applicant wishes to furnish.  

 

 I/We do hereby declare that the particulars furnished above are correct and am/are 

ready to furnish any other details, including accurate plans as may be required by you. 

 

Yours faithfully, 

 

(Signature and designation of the applicant) 

Place 

Date 

 

   *The topographical map of 1" = 1 mile scale 
1
[ or 1 : 50,000] is obtainable from the 

office of the Survey of India, Hathibarkhala, Dehra Dun. 

 

 Detailed plan and topographical map are to be, attached in triplicate with the original 

application in case mineral applied for is a scheduled mineral. 

 

     Note 1- If the application is signed by an authorised agent of the applicant, Power of Attorney 

                  should be attached. 

 

              2. The application should relate to one compact area only. 

 

              3. Such large-size map, as may be available.- should be attached for proper demarcation   

                  of the areas, specially when the area Applied for is 40 hectares or less. 

______________________________________________________________________________ 
1. Inserted by G.S.R.No. 743 (E), dated 25.9.2000. 

 



67 
 

 

 

 

 

FORM D 
 

 

Receipt of Applications for Prospecting Licence/Mining Lease or Renewals 

(See rules 10(4) and 23(4)] 

 

Government of                                                                                     Dated 

 

S.No. 

 

             Received the application with the following enclosures for a prospecting 

licence/ mining lease/renewal of prospecting licence/renewal of mining lease of 

Shri/Sarvashree ………………. on …………….  20… for about ………… ………….. 

hectare of land located in village/Govt. Forest Taluq ……………………….. District 

for prospecting/mining ……………………. mineral/minerals. 

 

Enclosures: 

 

Place 

Date 

Signature and designation 

of Receiving Officer  

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



68 
 

 

 

 

 
1
[FORM D- 1 

 

 

(Receipt of Application for Reconnaissance Permit) 

 

(See rule 4 – A) 

 

Government  of                                           

          

S.No.                                                                                           Dated 

 

 

 

                       Received the application with the following enclosures for a 

reconnaissance permit of Shri/Sarvashree …………………………………. 

on ……………20 . . for ……………….. square kilometres  of land located in 

village/Government  Forest Taluq ………………. District  for  reconnaissance 

of ………………mineral/minerals. 

 

Enclosures: 

 

Place 

Date 

 

 

Signature and designation 

of the Receiving Officer]  

   

 

 

 
1.  Inserted by G.S.R. 56 (E) dated 17.1.2000.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



69 
 

 

 

FORM E 
 

MODEL FORM 

 
"To be submitted in duplicate" 

GOVERNMENT OF  

 

Received...............                                                   Application for Renewal of  

at ……………… (Place)                                            Prospecting Licence 

on...........………...(date)                                                   [See rule 9(1)] 

Initial of Receiving Officer 

                                                                                      Dated      Day of         20… 

To 

Through 

 

Sir, 

 

              I/We request for renewal of my/our prospecting licence under the  Mineral 

Concession Rules, 1960. 

 

             A sum of Rs……….. being the fee in respect of this application at the  rate of 

Rs.50 for the first square kilometre or part thereof and Rs.10 for subsequent square 

kilometre or part thereof payable in  accordance with Schedule II to the Mineral 

Concession Rules, 1960 has  been deposited. 

 

             2.The required particulars are given below:- 

             (i)       Name of the applicant with complete address. 

(ii) Is the applicant a private individual/private company/public  company/  
            firm or association? 

            (iii)       In case applicant is: 

                         (a)   an individual, his nationality, 

(b) a company, an attested copy of the certificate of registration of 
       the company shall be enclosed, 

(c) Omitted. 
(d) firm or association, the nationality of all the partners of the firm 

or members of the association. 

            (iv)       Profession or nature of business of applicant. 

            (v) & (vi) Omitted 

            (via)    No. and date of the valid clearance certificate of payment of mining dues 

                        (copy enclosed).  

            (vii)    An affidavit, that up-to-date income tax returns, as prescribed under the 

                       Income Tax Act, 1961, have been filed and the tax due, including the tax 

                       on account of self-assessment has been paid. 

           (viii)    (a)   Particulars of the prospecting licence of which  renewal is desired. 

                       (b)   Details of previous renewal/renewals granted, if any. 



70 
 

 

 

(ix) Reasons in detail for asking for renewal of prospecting  licence along 
            with a report on the  prospecting already done. 

           (x)       Period for which renewal of prospecting licence is  desired. 

(xi)     Whether renewal is desired for the whole or part of the area held under  

           prospecting licence. 

(xii) In case the renewal applied for is only for part of the area held under 
            prospecting licence. 

                      (a)    the area applied for renewal. 

                      (b)    description of the area applied for renewal (description should  be 

                               adequate for the purposes of demarcating the plot). 

                      (c)   particulars of the map of area held under prospecting licence with 

     area applied for renewal clearly marked on it attached. 

           (xiiA) (a)  Does the applicant continue to have he surface rights  over the areas 

                              of   the  land   for  which  he  requires renewal  of   the  prospecting  

                              licence? 

                       (b) If not, has he obtained the consent of the owner and the occupier  for 

                            undertaking prospecting operations? If so, the consent of the  owner 

                            and occupier of the land obtained in writing, be filed. 

          (xiiB)  Particulars of the area mineral-wise in each State only  supported by an  

                      affidavit for which the applicant or any person jointly in interest with 

                      him - 

                      (a)    already holds under prospecting licence; 

                      (b)    has already applied for but not granted; or 

                      (c)    being applied for simultaneously. 

         (xiii)    Any other particulars which the applicant may wish to furnish. 

 

                    I/We do hereby declare that the particulars furnished above are  correct 

and am/are ready to furnish any other details, including  accurate plans, as may be 

required by you. 

 

                                                           Yours faithfully, 

 

 

Place                                                                     Signature and designation of 

Date                                                                                 the applicant 

 

N.B.- If the application is signed by an authorised agent of the applicant, Power of 

Attorney should be attached. 

 

 

 

 
 

 



71 
 

 

FORM F 
Model Form of Prospecting Licence 

[See rule 15(2)] 

 

                                                                 THIS INDENTURE made this................ day  

                                                  of........... 20 Between the Governor of ...... /the 

                                                  President of India (hereinafter Referred to as the `State           

                                                  Government' which expression shall where the context 

                                                  so admits be deemed to include his successors and  

    When the licensee               assigns) of the one part and..............................  

     is an individual                             (name of person with Address and occupation)  

                                                  (hereinafter referred to as "the licensee" which  

                                                  expression shall where the context so admits be deemed  

                                                  to include his heirs, executors, administrators,               

                                                   representatives and permitted assigns). 

 

                                                                ------------------------------------------------------- 

                                                  .......................................... (Name of person with 

When the licensee                                 address and occupation) and................... 

are more than                         (Name of person with addresses 

one individual.                                   and occupation) (hereinafter referred to as "the  

                                                  licensees" which expression shall where the context  

                                                  so admits be deemed to include their respective         

                                                  heirs, executors, administrators,representatives and 

                                                  permitted assigns). 

 

                                                                     ….................................................................. 

                                                  (Name and address of partner) son of ……................... . 

                                                  of......... ..................son of..........……. of.…...............son 

                                                  of.. . of......all carrying on business in partnership under 

                                                  the firm name and style of (name of the firm) registered     

                                                  under the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 (9 of 1932) and  

 When the licensee                   having their registered office at.............in the town  

 is a registered firm                 of..................(hereinafter referred To as "the licensees"  

                                                  which expression shall where the context so admits be  

                                                  deemed to include all the said partners, their respective 

                                                  heirs, executors, legal representatives and permitted  

                                                  assigns). 

 

                                                   ………............................................ ........... (Name of 

                                                  company) a company registered under........................... 

                                                  ........ (Act under which incorporated) and having its 

When the licensee is a                   registered office at...........(Address) (hereinafter is a       

registered company                 referred to as "the licensee" which expression  

                                                  shall where the context so admits be deemed to include  

                                                  its successors and permitted assigns) of the other part. 



72 
 

 

 

     WHEREAS the licensee/licensees has/have applied to the State Government in accordance 

with the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 (hereinafter referred to as the said Rules) for a licence 

to prospect for.................. in the land specified in Schedule `A' hereunder written and delineated 

in the plan herewith annexed (hereinafter referred to as the said lands) and has/have deposited 

with the State Government Rs............ as the prescribed security in respect of such licence and 

has/have paid to the State Government the sum of Rs………. as the prescribed prospecting fee 

for.......... months/ years in advance in respect of such licence and WHEREAS there is no 

objection to the grant of such licence 
1/

and WHEREAS the Central Government has approved 

the grant of this licence NOW THESE PRESENTS WITNESS as follows: 

 

PART-I 

 

      In consideration of the fee, royalties, covenants, and agreements hereinafter reserved 

and contained and on the part of the licensee/licensees to be paid observed and performed the 

State Government hereby grants and demises into the licensee/licensees the sole rights and 

licence. 

 

     To enter upon the lands and to search for, win or carry away and dispose of minerals won. 

 

(1) To enter upon the said lands and to search for by quarrying,boring and digging or 
otherwise all or any..........................(Name of minerals) lying or being within 

under or throughout the said lands; 

 

(2) in the case of minerals other than gold, silver, precious stones  or mica, this 
licence shall not confer upon the licensee a right to win or carry away the 

minerals for commercial purposes: 

 

       Provided that the licensees may win and carry away for purposes Other than 

commercial purposes- 

 

(a) any quantity of such minerals within the limits specified in Schedule III of the 
Mineral Concession Rules, 1960, without any payment; 

(b) any quantity of such minerals exceeding such limits but not exceeding twice 
such limits, which is won during prospecting operations on payment of royalty 

for the time being specified in the Second Schedule to the Act in respect of 

those minerals; 

(c) any quantity of limestone not exceeding 500 (tonnes) for testing its use in any 
industry specified by the Central Government in this behalf, on payments of 

royalty for the time being specified in the Second Schedule to the Act in respect 

of limestone; 

(d) With the written approval of the State Government, the licensee may carry away 
quantities of minerals in excess of twice the limit specified in the Schedule III 

on payment of royalty for the time being specified in the Second schedule to the 

Act, for chemical, metallurgical, ore-dressing and other test purposes; 

 
1/  In case of  “specified” minerals only. 



73 
 

 

     To clear undergrowth and brushwood, etc. 

 

(3) Subject to the provisions of clauses 5 and 6 of Part II of these presents for the 
purpose aforesaid to clear undergrowth and brushwood and trees with the 

sanction of the Deputy Commissioner/Collector previously obtained in writing, to 

make and use any drains or water courses on the said lands for purposes as may 

be necessary for effectually carrying on the prospecting operations and for the 

workmen employed thereon and with the like sanction to use any water provided 

always that such use shall not diminish or interfere with the supply of water to 

which any cultivated land, building or watering place, for livestock has heretofore 

been accustomed and streams, springs or well shall be fouled or polluted by any 

such use or the operations hereby licensed. 

 

     To bring upon and erect machinery etc. on the said lands 

 

(4) To erect and bring upon the said lands all such temporary huts, sheds and 
structures steam sand other engine machinery and conveniences, chattels and 

effects as shall be proper and necessary for effectually carrying on the prospecting 

operations hereby licensed or for the workmen employment thereon. 

 

      RESERVED nevertheless to the State Government full power and liberty at all times to 

enter into and upon and to grant or demise to any person or persons whomsoever liberty to enter 

into and upon the said lands for all or any purposes other than those for which sole rights and 

licence are hereby expressly conferred upon the licensee/licensees and particularly (and without 

hereby in any way qualifying such general power and liberty)to make on, over or through the 

said lands such roads, tramways and ropeways as shall be considered necessary or expedient for 

any purposes and to obtain from and out of the said lands such stone, earth or other materials as 

may be necessary or requisits for making, repairing or maintaining such roads, tramways, 

railways and ropeways to pass and repass at all times over and along such roads, tramways, 

railways and ropeways for all purposes and as occasion shall require. 

 

      To hold the said right and licence unto the licensee/licensees from the date of these 

presents for the term of (hereinafter referred to as the said term). 

 

     Paying therefor annually in advance a sum of Rs..................... being the prospecting fee for 

each year or portion of a year and immediately on the expiration of sooner determination of the 

said term clear of all fees, rates, taxes, charges, deductions and royalty at the rates specified in 

Schedules `B' and 'C' hereunder written on the minerals won and carried away by the 

licensee/licensees during the said terms. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



74 
 

 

PART-II 

Covenants by Licensee/Licensees  

 

      The licensee/licensees hereby covenants/covenant with the State Government as 

follows:- 

  

 Payment and rates of royalty 

 

 (1) To pay royalty to the State Government at such rates and at such time as are 

specified in Schedule `C' hereunder written provided that the licensee/licensees shall be entitled 

to carry away free of royalty not more than................. for experimental purposes. 

 

 Payment of prospecting fee 

 

 (2) To pay annually in advance a prospecting fee in respect of ensuing year or part of 

the year at such rates and time as are specified in Schedule `B' hereunder written. 

 

 To Carry on work in workman-like manner 

 

 (3) To work and carry on the operations hereby licensed in a fair orderly skilful and 

workman-like manner and with as little damage as may be to the surface of the lands and to 

trees, crops, buildings structures and other property thereon. 

 

 Maintenance of correct accounts 

 

 (4) Licensee/licensees shall maintain a correct and faithful account of all the expenses 

incurred by him/them on prospecting operations and also the quantity and other particulars of all 

minerals obtained during such operations and their despatch. 

 

      No mining operations within 50 metres of public work, etc. 

 

     (5) The licensee/licensees shall not work or carry on or allow to be worked or carried 

on any prospecting operations at or to any points within a distance of 50 metres from any railway 

line except with the previous written permission of the Railway Administration concerned or 

from any reservoir, canal or other public works such as public roads and buildings or inhabited 

site except with the previous written permission of the Deputy commissioner/Collector or any 

other Officer authorised by the State Government in this behalf and otherwise than in accordance 

with such instructions, restrictions and conditions either general or special which may be 

attached to such permission. The said distance of 50 metres shall be measured in the case of 

railway line, reservoir or canal horizontally from the outer toe of edge bank or the outer edge of 

the cutting as the case may be and in case of a building horizontally from the plinth thereof. In 

the case of village roads no workings shall be carried on within a distance of 10 metres of the 

outer edge of the cutting except with the previous written permission of the Deputy 

Commissioner/Collector or any other officer duly authorised by the State Government in this 

behalf and otherwise than in accordance with such directions, restrictions and additions, either 

general or special, which may be attached to such permission. 



75 
 

 

 

 

      Explanation : For the purposes of this clause the expression `Railways 

Administration’ shall have the same meaning as it is defined to have in the Indian Railways Act, 

1890, by clause (6) of section 3 of that Act. `Public Road' shall mean a road which has been 

constructed by artificially surfaced as distinct from a tract resulting form repeated use. Village 

road will include any track shown in the Revenue records a village road. 

 

     Not to cut or injure trees in reserved forest, etc. without previous permission. 

 

    (6) Not to cut or injure any timber or tree on any unoccupied or unreserved land 

without the written permission of the Deputy Commissioner/Collector nor without such 

permission disturb the surface of any road or enter upon any public pleasure ground, burning or 

burial ground or any place held sacred by any claws of persons or Interfere with any right of 

way, well or tank. 

 

    (7) 
1
 Not to enter upon any land in the occupation of any person without the consent of 

the occupier nor to cut or in any way injure any trees, standing crops, buildings buts, structures 

or other property of any kind, occupier of any land or any other person without the written 

consent at such owner, occupier or person. 

 

      Not to commence work in reserved forest without previous permission. 

 

    (8) Not to enter upon or commence prospecting in any protected or reserved forest 

situated upon the lands without obtaining the written sanction of the District Forest Officer nor 

otherwise than in accordance with such conditions as may be prescribed in such sanction. 

 

 Indemnify Government against all claims. 

 

    (9) To make reasonable satisfaction and pay such compensation as may be assessed by 

lawful authority in accordance with the law in force on the subject for all damage, injury, or 

disturbance which may be done by him in exercise of the powers granted by this licence and to 

indemnify and keep indemnified fully and completely the State Government against all claims 

which may be by any person or persons in respect of any such damage, injury or disturbance and 

all costs and expanses in connection therewith. 

 

      (9A) To pay a wage not less than the minimum wage prescribed by the Central or State 

Government from time to time. 

 

      (9B) To comply with the provisions of the Mines Act, 1952. 

 

      (9C) To take measures, at his own expense, for the protection of environment like 

planting of trees, reclamation of mined land, use of pollution-control devices, and such other 

measures as may be prescribed by the Central or State Government from time to time.  

 
1.  This clause should be suitably modified if it be not in accordance with the provision of  local land. 



76 
 

 

 (9D) To pay compensation to the occupier of the surface of the land on the date and in 

the manner laid down in these rules. 

       

 Forfeiture of security deposits, etc. 

 

      (10) Whenever the security deposit of Rs.......... or any part thereof or any further sum 

hereafter deposited with the State Government in replenishment thereof shall be forfeited or 

applied by the State/Central Government. Pursuant to the power hereinafter declared in that 

behalf the licensee/licensees shall forthwith deposit with the State Government such further sum 

as may be sufficient with the unappropriated part thereof to bring the amount in deposit with the 

State Government up to the sum of Rs.................. 

 

      Licensee not to be Controlled by trust, syndicate, etc. 

 

      (11) The licensee/licensees shall not be controlled or permit himself/themselves to be 

controlled by any trust, syndicate, corporation, firm or person except with the written consent of 

the State Government which will be given only after obtaining the prior approval of the Central 

Government in cases where prospecting licence executed is in respect of minerals included in the 

First Schedule to the Act. 

 

       Report of accident 

 

 (12) The licensee/licensees without delay send to the Deputy Commissioner/Collector 

a report of any accident causing death or serious bodily injury or serious injury to property or 

seriously affecting or endangering life or property which may occur in the course of the 

operations under this licence.  

 

     Section 18 of the Act 67 of 1957 

 

      (13) The licensee/licensees shall be bound by such rules as may be issued by the 

Central Government under section 18 of the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) 

Act, 1957 (67 of 1957) and shall not carry on prospecting or other operations under the said 

licence in any way other than as prescribed under these rules. 

 

       To provide for weighing or measurement of material won 

 

      (14) At such times and occasions as may be required the licensee/licensees shall well 

and truly measure or weigh or cause to be measured or weighed upon some part of the said lands 

all minerals from time to time won from the said lands by the licensee/licensees and all such 

minerals as may require to be measured or weighed for the purpose of ascertaining the royalty 

payable under these presents shall be so measured or weighed. The licensee/licensees 

agrees/agree not to take away from the said lands any minerals so won until the same shall have 

been measured or weighed as the case may be. The licensee/licensees further agrees/agree to 

give............. days previous notice in writing to the Deputy Commissioner/Collector of every 

such measuring or weighing in order that he or some person on his behalf may be present thereat. 

 



77 
 

 

        Plugging of bore holes, fencing, etc., and restoring the surface of land after 

determination of abandonment. 

 

         (15) Save in the case of land over which the licensee/licensees shall have been granted 

a mining lease, on or before the expiration or sooner determination of the licence, he shall within 

six months next after the expiration or sooner determination of the licence or date of 

abandonment of the undertaking, whichever shall first occur, securely plug any bore or hole and 

fill up or fence any holes or excavations that may have been made in the lands to such an extent 

as may be required by the Deputy Commissioner/Collector concerned and shall to a like extent 

restore the surface of the land and all buildings there on which may have been damaged or 

destroyed in the course of prospecting provided that licensee/licensees shall not be required to 

restore the surface of the land, or any building in respect of which full and proper compensation 

has already been paid. 

 

         Removal of machinery, etc. after expiration, determination of abandonment. 

 

       (16) Upon the expiration or sooner determination of this licence or the abandonment of 

the operations hereby licensed, whichever shall first occur, the licensee/licensees shall remove 

expeditiously at his/their own cost all buildings, structures, plant, engines machinery, 

implements, utensils and other property and effects theretofore, erected or brought by the 

licensee/licensees and then standing or being upon the said lands and also all minerals 

theretofore won by the licensee/licensees under the authority of these presents and then being 

upon the said lands PROVIDED that this covenant shall not apply to any part of the said lands 

which may be comprised in any mining lease granted to the licensee/licensees during the 

subsistence of this licence. 

      

      Report of work done before the refund of security deposits 

 

    (17) At any time before the said security deposit is returned to him/them or transferred 

to any other account or (within one month after the expiration or sooner determination of the 

licence or abandonment of the operations whichever is earlier, the licensee/licensees shall submit 

to the State Government confidentially a full report of the work done by him/them and disclose 

all information acquired by him them in the course of the operations carried on under this licence 

regarding the geology and mineral resources of the area covered by the licence. 

 

       Report of information obtained by Licensee; 

 

      (17A)(1) The licensee shall submit to State Government : 

 

(a)    a quarterly report of the work done by him stating the number of persons 
engaged and disclosing in full the geological, geophysical, or other 

valuable data collected by him during the period. The report shall be 

submitted within three months of the close of the period to which it 

relates; 

(b)    within three months of the expiry of the licence, or abandonment of 
operations or termination of the licence, whichever is earlier, a full report 



78 
 

 

of the work done by him and all information relevant to mineral resources 

acquired by him in the course of prospecting operations in the area 

covered by the licence. 

 

        (2)   While submitting reports under clause (1), the licensee may specify that the whole 

or any part of the report or data submitted by him shall be kept confidential and 

the State Government shall thereupon keep the specified portions as confidential 

for a period of two years from the expiry of the licence, or abandonment of 

operations or termination of the licence, whichever is earlier. 

 

      Employment of foreign nationals 

 

        (18) the licensee/licensees shall not employ, in connection with the prospecting 

operation any person who is not an Indian National except with the previous approval of the 

Central Government. 

 

         Furnishing of Geophysical data 

 

       (19) The licensee/licensees shall furnish : 

 

(a)   all geophysical data relating to prospecting or engineering and ground water 
surveys, such as anomaly maps, sections, plans, structures, contour maps, 

logging, collected by him/them during the course of prospecting 

operations to the Director General, Geological Survey of India, Calcutta; 

 

(b)     all information pertaining to investigations of radio active minerals 
collected by him/them during the course of prospecting operations to the 

Secretary to the Department of Atomic Energy, New Delhi. 

 

        Data or information referred to above shall be furnished every year reckoned from the 

date of commencement of the period of the prospecting licence. 

 

 

PART-III  

Powers of the government 

 

      It is hereby agreed as follows;- 

 

      Cancellation of the licence and forfeiture of the deposit in case breach of conditions 

 

 (1) In the case of any breach of the condition of the licence/licences or his transferees 

or assignees, the State Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the licensee/licensees 

of stating him/their case and where it is satisfied that the breach is such as cannot be remedied, 

on giving thirty days notice to the licensee/licensees or his transferees or assignees, determine 

the licence and or forfeit the whole or any part of the said deposit of Rs......... deposited under the 

covenants in that behalf as the State Government may deem fit. In case the State Government 



79 
 

 

considers the breach to be of a remediable nature, it shall give notice to the licensee/licensees or 

his transferees or assignees as the case may be requiring him/them to remedy the breach within 

thirty days from the date of receipt of the notice informing him of the penalty proposed to be 

inflicted if such remedy is not made within such period. 

 

      Application of security to payment of compensation 

 

 (2) The State Government may from time to time appropriate and apply the said 

deposit of Rs…….. or any part thereof or any further sum deposited under any covenants in that 

behalf hereinbefore contained in or towards payment or satisfaction of any claims to 

compensation which the Government has or may have against the licensee/licensees and/or 

which may be made by any person or persons against the licensee/licensees and or the State 

Government in respect of_any damage or injury done by the licensee/licensees in exercise of any 

of the powers conferred by this licence and in or towards payment of any damages, costs or 

expenses which may become payable as the result of or in connection with any suits or 

proceedings which may be instituted against the State Government in respect of any such 

damage or injury and also in or towards payment of the expense of the carrying out or 

performance of any works or matters which the licensee/licensees shall fail to carry out or 

perform after the expiry or sooner determination  of this licence or the abandonment of the 

operations hereby licensed in accordance with the covenants in that behalf hereinbefore 

contained or in payment or satisfaction of any such claims, damages, costs and expenses.  

 

      When the properties of licensee are not removed from the lands in time  

 

      (3) If any buildings, structures, plants, engines, machinery implements utensils or other 

property or effects or any minerals which ought to be removed by the licensee/licensees from the 

said lands, in accordance with the covenant in that behalf hereinbefore contained be not so 

removed within one calendar month after notice in writing requiring their removal shall have 

been given to the licensee/licensees by the State Government, the same shall be deemed to 

become the property of the State Government and may be sold or disposed of for the benefit of 

the State Government in such manner as the State Government shall deem fit, without any 

liability to pay any compensation  to account to licensee/licensees in respect thereof. 

 

      Licensee/licensees to pay for work done on his behalf 

 

 (4) If any of the works or matters which in accordance with the covenants in that 

behalf hereinbefore contained are to be carried out or performed by the licensee/licensees, be not 

so carried out or performed within the time specified In that behalf, the State Government may 

cause the same to be carried out or performed and the licensee/licensees shall pay the State 

Government on demand all expenses which shall be incurred in such carrying out or performance 

of the same. 

 

      Right of pre-emption 

 

 (5) (a)  The State Government shall from time to time and at all times during the said 

term have the right (to be exercised by notice in writing to the 



80 
 

 

licensee/licensees) of pre-emption of the said minerals (and/all products 

thereof) lying in or upon the said lands or elsewhere under the control of the 

licensee/licensees and the licensee/licensees shall with all possible 

expedition deliver all minerals or products or minerals purchased by the 

State Government under the power conferred by this provision in the 

quantities at the time in the manner and at the place specified in the notice 

exercising the said right. 

 

    (b)  Should the right of pre-emption conferred by this present provision be 

exercised and a vessel chartered to carry the minerals or products thereof 

procured on behalf of the State Government or the Central Government be 

detained on demurrage at the port of loading, the licensee/licensees shall pay 

the amount due for demurrage according to the terms of the charter party of 

such vessel unless the State Government shall be satisfied that the delay 

issue to cause beyond the control of the licensee/licensees. 

 

 (c)  The price to be paid for all minerals or products of minerals  taken in pre-

emption by the State Government in exercise of the right hereby conferred 

shall be the fair market prevailing at the time of pre-emption, PROVIDED 

THAT in order to assist in arriving at the said fair market price the 

licensee/licensees shall it so required furnish to the State Government for the 

confidential information of the Government, particulars of the quantities, 

descriptions and prices of the said mineral or products thereof sold to other 

customers and of charters entered into for freight for carriage of the two and 

shall produce such to officer or officers as may be directed by the State 

Government original or authenticated copies of contracts and charter parties 

entered into for the sale of freightage of such minerals or products. 

 

      (d)  In the event of the existence of a state of war or emergency (of which 

existence the President of India shall be the sole judge and a notification to 

this effect in the Gazette of India shall be conclusive proof) the State 

Government with the consent of the Central Government shall from time to 

time and at all times during the said term have the right (to be exercised by a 

notice in writing to the licensee/licensees) forthwith take possession and 

control of the works, plant, machinery and premises of the licensee/licensees 

on or in connection with the said lands or the operations under this licence 

and during such possession or control, the licensee/licensees shall conform to 

and obey all directions given by or on behalf of the Central or State 

Government regarding the use of employment of such works, plants, 

premises and minerals, PROVIDED THAT fair compensation, which shall 

be determined in default of agreement by the State Government shall be paid 

to the licensee/licensees for all loss or damage sustained by him/them by 

reason or in consequence of the exercises of the powers conferred by this 

clause and PROVIDED ALSO that the exercise of such power shall not 

determine the said term hereby granted or affect the terms and provisions of 



81 
 

 

these presents further than may be necessary to give effect to the provisions 

of this clause. 

 

PART-IV 

Rights of licensee/licensees 

 

It is hereby further agreed as follows:- 

 

 Transfer of licence and fee payable 

 

     (1) During the subsistence of this licence or of any renewal thereof the 

licensee/licensees may, with the previous sanction of the State Government, transfer his/their 

licence or any right, title or interest therein to a person who has filed an affidavit stating that he 

has filed up-to-date income tax returns, paid income tax assessed on him and paid the income tax 

on the basis of self-assessment as provided in the Income Tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), on 

payment of a fee of five hundred rupees.  Provided that the State Government shall, not give its 

sanction unless - 

 

      (i)  the licensee has furnished an affidavit along with his application for transfer of 

the prospecting licence specifying therein the amount that he has already taken or 

propose to take as consideration from the transferee; 

 

 (ii)  the transfer of the prospecting licence is to be made to a person or body directly 

undertaking prospecting operations. 

 

        Renewal of Prospecting Licence 

 

      (2) If the licensee/licensees be desirous of taking a renewed licence of the premises 

hereby demised or of any parts of that for a further term from the expiration of the term hereby 

granted and is otherwise eligible, he/they shall apply to the State Government for renewal at least 

prior to the date of expiration of the term of licence under these convenants and shall pay the 

rents and royalties hereby reserved and shall observe and perform the several covenants and 

agreements herein contained and on the part of licensee/licensees to he observed and performed 

up to the expiration of the term hereby granted. The State Government on receipt of the 

application for renewal shall consider it in accordance with relevant sections of the Act and 

relevant rules of the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 and shall pass such orders as it may deem 

fit. If renewal is granted the State Government will at the expense of the licensee/licensees and 

upon his/their executing and delivering to the State Government, if required, the counterpart 

thereof, execute and deliver to the licensee/licensees the renewed licence of the said premises or 

part thereof for a further term of...... years at such rates of royalty and on such terms and subject 

to such rates and royalties and on such terms and subject to such convenants and agreements 

including this present covenant be renewed and shall in accordance with the Mineral Concession 

Rules, 1960 applicable.................................... 

(names of minerals) on the day next following the expiration of the term hereby granted. 

 

     



82 
 

 

  Preferential right of the licensee/licensees for obtaining mining Lease 

 

 (3) On or before the determination of the licence or any renewal thereof, the 

licensee/licensees shall have a preferential right for obtaining a mining lease in respect of whole 

or part of that land over any other person, provided that the State Government is satisfied that the 

licensee/licensees has/have not committed any breach of the terms and conditions of the 

prospecting licence, [has undertaken prospecting operations to establish mineral resources in 

such land] and is otherwise a fit person for being granted the mining lease.   

 

 (3-A) If an application for renewal of the prospecting licence made in accordance with 

the rules is not disposed of by the State Government before the expiry of the licence, the licence 

shall be deemed to have been renewed for a period [not exceeding the period prescribed for the 

renewal of prospecting licence under sub-section (2) of section 7 of the Act or the period for 

which the application is made, whichever is less. 

 

      Extension of period of prospecting licence 

 

 (4) If the licensee/licensees before the determination of this licence or of any renewal 

thereof applies/apply for the grant of a mining lease over the whole or any part of  the said lands, 

the period of this licence shall be further extended over that part of the said lands, until his 

application for mining lease is disposed of or deemed to have been refused under sub-rule (1) or 

sub-rule (3), as the case may be, of rule 24 of the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960, or any other 

law in force.  No fee shall be payable in respect of any period so extended. 

 

      Refund of deposit 

      

     (5) On such date within six calendar months after the determination of this licence or 

of any renewal thereof, as the State Government shall elect after compliance by the 

licensee/licensees of rule 16 of Mineral Concession Rules, 1960, the amount then remaining in 

deposit with the State Government and not required to be applied to any of the purposes in Part 

III of these presents mentioned, shall be refunded to the licensee/licensees or if the 

licensee/licensees shall have obtained a mining lease over the said lands or any portion thereof, 

be retained at the credit of the licensee/licensees on account of the fees, rents and royalties to 

become payable under such lease. The amount shall in no case carry any interest whatsoever. 

 

 

PART-V 

General Provisions 

 

     It is lastly agreed as follows:- 

 

      Acquisition of land and compensation thereof 

 

     (1) If after the receipt of an offer of compensation for any damage which is likely to 

arise from the proposed operation of the licensee/licensees, the occupier of the surface of any 

part of the said lands shall refuse his consent to the exercise of the rights and powers reserved to 



83 
 

 

the State Government and granted by this licence, the licensee/licensees shall report the matter to 

the State Government and shall deposit with it the amount offered as compensation and if the 

State Government is satisfied that the amount of compensation is reasonable or if it is not so 

satisfied and the licensee/licensees shall have deposited with it such further amount as the State 

Government may consider reasonable, the State Government shall order the occupier to allow the 

licensee/licensees to enter upon the said land and carry out such operations as may be necessary 

for the purpose of the licence. In assessing the amount of such compensation the State 

Government shall he guided by the principles of the Land Acquisition Act. 

 

      Delay in fulfilment of the term of licence due to force majeure 

 

 (2) Failure on the part of the licensee/licensees to fulfil any of the terms and conditions 

of this licence shall not give the State Government any claim against him/them or be deemed a 

breach of the licence in so far as such failure is considered by the State Government to arise from 

force majeure.  If the fulfilment of the licensee/licensees of any of the terms and conditions of 

this licence be delayed from force majeure, the period of such delay shall be added to the period 

fixed by this licence. 

 

      The expression force majeure means act of God, war, insurrection,riot, civil 

commotion, strike, tide tidal wave, storm, flood, lightning, explosion, fire, earthquake and any 

other happening which the licensee/licensees could not reasonably prevent or control. 

 

      Service of notices 

 

      (3) Every notice required to be given to the licensee/licensees shall be given in writing 

to such person as the licensee/licensees may appoint for the purpose of receiving such notices or 

if no such appointment is made then the notice shall be sent to the licensee/licensees by 

registered post addressed to him/them at the address shown in his/their application for the licence 

or at such other address in India as he/they designate from time to time and every such service 

shall be deemed to be proper and valid service upon the licensee/licensees and shall not be 

questioned or challenged by him. 

 

      Discovery of new minerals 

 

       (4) The licensee shall report to the State Government the discovery of any mineral not 

specified in the licence within a period of sixty days from the date of such discovery and shall 

not undertake any prospecting operations in respect of such mineral unless such mineral is 

included in the licence. 

 

        Immunity of State Government from liability to pay compensation 

 

 (5) If in any event the orders of the State Government are revised, reviewed or 

cancelled by the Central Government in pursuance of proceedings under Chapter VII of the 

Mineral Concession Rules, 1960, the licensee/licensees shall not be entitled to compensation for 

any loss sustained by the licensee/licensees in exercise of the powers and privileges conferred 

upon him/them by these presents. 



84 
 

 

 

(6) The licence deed is executed at the Capital of the State of ……………….. (Name of 

the State) and subject to the provision of article 226 of the Constitution of India it is hereby 

agreed upon by the licensee and the State Government that in the event of any dispute in relation 

to the area under prospecting licence, condition of the licence deed and in respect of all matters 

touching the relationship of the licensee and the State Government, suits of petitions shall be 

filed in civil courts at ……………………(name of the city) and it is hereby expressly agreed 

that neither party shall file a suit or appeal or bring any actions at any place other than the courts 

named above. 

 

     IN WITNESS WHEREOF these presents have been executed in the manner hereunder 

appearing the day and year first above written. 

 

SCHEDULE A 

The land covered by the licence 

 

 (Here insert the description of lands with area, boundaries, names of District, Sub-

Division, Thana, etc. and cadastral survey numbers, if any. In case a map is attached, refer the 

map in the description to be inserted.) 

 

SCHEDULE B 

Prospecting Fee 

 

 (Here specify the amount of the prospecting fee and the manner and time of payment) 

 

 

SCHEDULE C 

Royalty 

 

1. Rates of royalty on minerals shall be in accordance with the Second Schedule of 
the Act. 

 

2. (a) Here insert the mode of arriving at sale prices at pits mouth of    
            mineral/ minerals. 

 

       (b) The manner and time of payment of royalty 



85 
 

 

 

1
[FORM F -1 

 

(RECONNAISSANCE  PERMIT  DEED) 

 

( See rule 7A ) 

 

When the permit                                                 THIS INDENTURE made this................ …day                       

holder is                             of……............. 20      between the Governor of ...... /the President of  

individual                          India ( hereinafter  referred to as the   `State Government'  which  

                                            expression shall where the  context so admits be deemed to include                      

                                            his successors and assigns) of  the one part and............................. and  

                                            …………………………. (name of person with  address and  

                                            occupation) (hereinafter referred to as "the  permit holder" 

                                            which expression shall where the context so admits be deemed 

                                            to  include his heirs, executors, administrators,  

                                            representatives and  permitted assigns).  

 

When the permit                ……………………………………………………………………….     

holders are more               ……………………..................... (Name of person with  address and 

than one individual           occupation) and………....................(Name of person with  addresses  

                                            and occupation) (hereinafter referred to as "the permit holders" which  

                                            expression shall where the  context  so admits be  deemed to   include  

                                            their respective heirs, executors, administrators,  representatives and  

                                            their permitted assigns).  

 

When the permit              . .......................…………….. (Name and  address of partner)  son  of  

 holder is                          ……………………............. .  of......... ................………………….. … 

 A registered firm            …………………………son of.........……………...of..............………. 

.                                         …………………….son  of……………… of...………………………. 

                                           all carrying on business in  partnership under the firm  name and style 

                                           of  (name of the firm)  ……………………………………… 

                                           registered  under the  Indian   Partnership  Act, 1932 (9 of 1932) 

                                           and  having their registered office  at...........…..in the  

                                           town of .................. …. (hereinafter referred  to as `the permit holder'  

                                           which  expression  shall where  the  context so  admits  be deemed  to  

                                            include all the said  partners, their respective  heirs,  executors,  legal  

                                           representatives and  permitted assigns).  

 

When the permit               ........................................... ........... ……………………….. (Name of  

holder is                             company) a company  registered under....................……………...Act 

a registered company.      under which incorporated) and having its registered office  at...….......   

                                            ……………….( Address )  ( hereinafter  referred  to  as  "the permit  

                                             

 

1 Inserted by G.S.R. No. 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000. 



86 
 

 

                           

                                 holder"  which expression shall where the context so admits be 

                                            deemed to  include its successors and permitted assigns) of the other  

                                            part.     

  

WHEREAS the permit holder/holders has/have applied to the State  Government in 

accordance with the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960  (hereinafter referred to as the said Rules) 

for a reconnaissance permit to prospect  for.................. in the land specified in Schedule `A' 

hereunder  written and delineated in the plan herewith annexed (hereinafter  referred to as the 

said lands) and has/have deposited with the State  Government Rs............ as the prescribed 

security according to rule 7B in respect of  such permit and has/have paid to the State 

Government the sum of Rs…………..  as the prescribed permit fee for.......... months/ years in  

advance in respect of such permit and WHEREAS  there is no  objection to the grant of such 

permit and WHEREAS the Central Government has  approved the grant of this permit. NOW 

THESE PRESENTS WITNESS as  follows:  

 

 

PART-I 
           

           In consideration of the fee,  covenants and agreements  hereinafter reserved and 

contained  

and on the part of the  permit holder(s) to be paid, observed and performed, the State 

Government hereby grants the reconnaissance permit and demises into the permit holder(s) the 

rights. 

 

(1) To enter upon or fly over the lands and undertake reconnaissance operations :  

           

To enter upon or fly over the said lands and to undertake reconnaissance operations to 

search for all, or any........................... (Name of minerals) lying, or being within, under or 

throughout the said land :       

          

            Provided that : 

  

 the permit holder shall not enter any forest land or any private land without obtaining 

permission  of the forest department or the owner of the private land, as the case  may be;   

 

the permit holder shall not fly over the said land unless all necessary clearances from the 

Defence and Home Ministries, Govt. of India and the Director General, Civil Aviation, 

Government of India have been obtained for undertaking aerial surveys.   

 

(2) To use water and clear undergrowth and brush wood etc.:     

 

Subject to the provisions of clause (1) to  make and use any drains or water, grounds on 

the said land for purposes as may be necessary for effectively carrying on the 

reconnaissance  operations and to the workers employed therein and  to use  water 

provided  always that such use shall not diminish or interfere with the supply of water to 



87 
 

 

which any cultivated land, village, building or watering place for livestock has heretofore 

been accustomed and that no streams, springs or well shall be fouled or polluted nor any 

trees cut or injured by any such use or the reconnaissance operations hereby permitted. 

 

(3) To bring upon  machinery etc. : 

 

To bring upon the said lands  such machinery, equipment and conveniences  as may be 

proper and necessary for effectively carrying on the reconnaissance operations hereby 

permitted or for the workmen employed thereon.        

 

Reserved nevertheless to the State Government full power and  liberty at all times to 

enter into and upon the said  lands for all or any purposes other than those for which sole  

rights and permit hereby expressly conferred upon . 

 

To hold the said right and permit unto the permit holder(s)  from the date of these 

presents for the term of …………………   (hereinafter referred  as the said term).   

 

Paying therefor annually in advance a sum of  Rs..................... being the permit fee for 

each year or  portion of a year as specified in Schedule B and immediately on the 

expiration or sooner  determination of the said term clear of all fees, rates, taxes,  charges  

and  deductions  by the permit holder(s)  during the said terms.  

 

 

PART-II 

 
Covenants by Permit holder(s) 

 

The Permit holder(s) hereby covenants/covenant with the State  Government as follows:-  

           

Payment of permit fee: 

 

(1) To pay annually in advance a permit fee in respect of  ensuing year or part of the 
year at such rates and time as are  specified in Schedule `B' hereunder written. 

 

To carry on work in workman-like manner: 

 

(2) To work and carry on the operations hereby permitted in a  fair, orderly, skilful and 
workman-like manner and with as little damage  as may be to the surface of the 

lands and to trees, crops, buildings  structures and other property thereon. 

 

 Maintenance of correct accounts : 

 

(3) Permit holder(s) shall maintain an accurate and faithful  account of all the expenses 
incurred by him/them on reconnaissance and also the quantity and other particulars of 

all samples obtained during such operations and their despatch. 

 



88 
 

 

 

Not to cut or injure trees or disturb public places without previous permission : 

 

(4) Not to cut or injure any timber or tree on any unoccupied or  unreserved land without 
the written permission of the Deputy  Commissioner/Collector nor without such 

permission disturb the surface  of any road or enter upon any public pleasure ground, 

burning or  burial ground or any place  held sacred by any class of persons or interfere  

with any right of way, well or tank. 

 

(5) Not to enter upon any land in the occupation of any person without the consent of the 
occupier nor to cut or in any way  injure any trees, standing crops, buildings, huts, 

structures or other property of any kind of the occupier of any land or any other  person 

without the written consent of such owner, occupier or person.   

 

Not to commence work in  forest lands without previous permission : 

 

(6) Not to enter upon or commence reconnaissance or prospecting in any forest land 
without obtaining the  written sanction of the  Forest Officer so authorised in this 

behalf by the State Government. 

 

 Indemnify Government against all claims : 

 

(7)  To make reasonable satisfaction and pay such compensation as   assessed by lawful 

authority in accordance with the law in  force on the subject for all damage, injury, or 

disturbance which may  be done by him in exercise of the powers granted by this 

permit and  to indemnify and keep indemnified fully and completely the State  

Government against all claims which may be made by any person or persons  in 

respect of any such damage, injury or disturbance and all costs and expenses in 

connection therewith.  

 

Abide by other Acts and Rules : 

 

(8A) To pay a wage not less than the minimum wage prescribed by the Central or State  

            Government from time to time.  

 

          (8B) To comply with the provisions of the Mines Act, 1952.  

 

          (8C) To take measures, at his own expenses, for the protection of environment  as may be  

                     prescribed by the Central or State Government from time to time.  

 

         (8D) To pay compensation to the occupier of the surface of  the land on the date and in  

                     the manner laid down in these rules. 

 

 

 

 



89 
 

 

 

 Forfeiture of security deposits, etc. : 

 

(9)  Whenever the security deposit of Rs.......... or any part  thereof of any further sum 

hereafter deposited with the State  Government in replenishment thereof shall be 

forfeited or applied by  the State/Central Government, pursuant to the power 

hereinafter  declared in that behalf the permit holder(s) shall forthwith deposit  

with the State Government such further sum as may be sufficient with  the 

unappropriated part thereof to bring the amount in deposit with the  State 

Government up to the sum of Rs..................  

 

Permit holder not to be controlled by trust, syndicate, etc. : 

 

          (10)  The permit holder(s) shall not be controlled or permit  himself/themselves to be 

controlled by any trust, syndicate,  corporation, firm or person except with the 

written consent of the  State Government which will be given only after obtaining 

the prior  approval of the Central Government in case where reconnaissance 

permit  executed is in respect of minerals included in the First Schedule to  the 

Act.  

 

Report of accident : 

 

(11)  The permit holder(s) shall  without delay send to the Deputy Commissioner/ 

Collector a report of any accident causing death or  serious bodily injury or 

serious injury to property or seriously  affecting or endangering life or property 

which may occur in the  course of the  operations under this permit. 

 

Section 18 of the Act  : 

 

(12)  The permit holder(s) shall be bound by such rules as may  be issued by the 

Central Government under section 18 of the Act and shall  not carry on 

reconnaissance, prospecting or other operations under the said permit in  any way 

other than as prescribed under these rules. 

 

Plugging of bore holes, fencing, etc. and restoring the surface  of land after determination or 

abandonment : 

 

(13)  Save in the case of land over which the permit holder(s) shall have been granted a 

prospecting licence or  mining lease, on or before the expiration or  sooner 

determination of the permit, he shall within six months next  after the expiration 

or sooner determination of the permit or the date of  abandonment of the 

undertaking, whichever shall first occur, securely  plug any bore or hole and fill 

up or fence any holes or excavations  that may have been made in the lands to 

such an extent as may be  required by the Deputy Commissioner/Collector 

concerned and shall to a  like extent, restore the surface of the land and  all 

buildings thereon, which may have been damaged or destroyed in the course of 



90 
 

 

reconnaissance or prospecting, provided that permit holder(s) shall not be 

required to restore the surface of land or any building in respect  of which  full 

and proper compensation has already been paid.  

 

Removal of machinery, etc. after expiration, determination or  abandonment :  

 

(14)  Upon the expiration or sooner determination of this permit  or the abandonment of 

the operations hereby permitted, whichever shall  first occur, the permit holder(s) 

shall remove expeditiously at  his/their own cost all plants, engines, machinery  

implements, utensils and other property and effects theretofore,  erected or 

brought by the permit holder(s) and then standing or being  upon the said lands 

provided that this covenant shall not apply  to any part of the said lands which 

may be comprised in any prospecting licence or mining  lease granted to the 

permit holder(s) during the subsistence of this  permit. 

 

Report of work done before the refund of security deposits : 

 

            (15)  At any time before the said security deposit is returned to  him/them or transferred 

to any other account or within one month after the expiration or sooner  

determination of the permit or abandonment of the operations  whichever is 

earlier, the permit holder(s) shall submit to the State  Government confidentially a 

full report of the work done by him/them  and disclose all information acquired by 

him/ them in the course of the  operations carried on under this permit regarding 

the geology and  mineral resources of the area covered by the permit. 

 

Report of information obtained by Permit holder : 

 

 (16)(1) The permit holder(s) shall submit to State Government : 

 

(a)  a six monthly report of the work done by him/them stating the number of persons 

engaged and disclosing in full the geological, geophysical, or other valuable data 

collected by him during the period.  

 

    The report shall be submitted within three months of the  close of the period to which it 

relates 

 

(b) within three months of the expiry of the permit, or abandonment  of operations or 

termination of the permit, whichever is earlier, a full report of the work done by him and 

all information relevant to  mineral resources acquired by him/them in the course of 

reconnaissance in the area covered by the permit : 

 

 (2) While submitting reports under clause (1), the permit holder(s) may  specify that 

the whole or any part of the report or data submitted by him shall be kept confidential and 

the State Government shall thereupon keep the specified portions as confidential; for a 

period of two years from the expiry of the permit or abandonment of operations of 

termination of the permit, whichever is earlier. 



91 
 

 

 

Employment of foreign nationals :  

 

 (17) the permit holder(s) shall not employ, in connection with the reconnaissance 

operation any person who is not an Indian National except with the previous approval of the 

Central Government. 

 

Furnishing of Geophysical data : 

 

 (18) The permit holder(s) shall furnish:  

 

(a) all geophysical data relating to prospecting or engineering and ground water 
surveys, such as anomaly maps, sections, plans, structures, contour maps, logging, 

collected by him/them during the course of reconnaissance to the Director General,  

Geological Survey of India, Calcutta; 

 

(b) all information pertaining to investigations of radio active minerals collected 
by him/them during the courses of operations to the Secretary to the Department of 

Atomic Energy,  New Delhi.  

 

Data or information referred to above shall be furnished every  year reckoned from the date of 

commencement of the period of the  reconnaissance permit. 

 

PART III -  Powers of the Government 
 

 It is hereby agreed as follows:-  

 

Cancellation of the permit and forfeiture of the deposit in case  of breach of conditions:   

 

(1) In the case of any breach of  any condition of the permit by the permit holders (s) or his 
transferees or assignees, the State Government  shall give a reasonable opportunity to the 

permit holder(s) of  stating his/their case and where it is satisfied that the breach is  such as 

cannot be remedied, on giving thirty days notice to the  permit holder(s) or his transferees or 

assignees, determine the  permit and or forfeit the whole or any part of the said deposit   

Rs......... deposited under the covenants in that behalf as the State  Government may deem 

fit. In case the State Government considers the  breach to be of a remediable nature, it shall 

give notice to the permit holder(s) or his transferees or assignees as the case may be  

requiring him/them to remedy the breach within thirty days from the  date of receipt of the 

notice informing him of the penalty proposed to  be inflicted if such remedy is not made 

within such period.  

 

 

 

 

 



92 
 

 

Application of security to payment of compensation : 

 

(2) The State Government may from time to time appropriate and  apply the said deposit of 

Rs………………… or any part thereof or any further sum  deposited under any covenants 

in that behalf hereinbefore contained  in or towards payment or satisfaction of any claims to 

compensation  which the Government has or may have against the permit holder(s)  and/or 

which may be made by any person or persons against the  permit holder(s) and or the State 

Government in respect of any  damage or injury done by the permit holder(s) in exercise of 

any of  the powers conferred by this permit and in or towards payment of any  damages, 

cost or expenses which may become payable as the result of or  in connection with any 

suits or proceedings which may be instituted  against the State Government in respect of 

any such damage or injury  and also in or towards payment of the expenses of the carrying 

out or  performance of any works or matters, which the permit holder(s) shall  fail to carry 

out or perform after the expiry or sooner determination  of this permit or the abandonment 

of the operations hereby permitted in accordance with the covenants in that behalf 

hereinbefore contained  or in payment or satisfaction of such claims, damages, costs and  

expenses. 

 

 When the properties are not removed from the lands in  time : 

 

(3)  If any plants, engines, machinery  implements, utensils or other property or effects which  

ought to be, removed by the permit holder(s) from the said lands, in  accordance with the 

covenant in that behalf hereinbefore contained,  be not so removed within one calendar 

month after notice in writing  requiring their removal shall have been given to the  permit 

holder(s) by the State Government, the same shall be deemed  to have become the property 

of the State Government and may be sold or  disposed of for the benefit of the State 

Government in such manner as  the State Government shall deem fit, without any liability to 

pay any  compensation or to account to the permit holder(s) in respect thereof. 

 

 Permit holder(s) to pay for work done on his/their behalf : 

 

(4)  If any of the works or matters, which in accordance with the  covenants in that behalf 

hereinbefore contained, are to be carried out  or performed by the permit holder(s), be not so 

carried out, or  performed within  time specified in that behalf, the State  Government may 

cause the same to be carried out or performed and the  permit holder(s) shall pay the State 

Government on demand all  expenses which shall be incurred in such carrying out or 

performance  of the same. 

 

 Right of pre-emption :  

 

(5)  In the event of the existence of a state of war or emergency (of  which  the President of India 

shall be the sole judge and a  notification to this effect in the Gazette of India shall be 

conclusive proof), the State Government with the consent of the  Central Government shall, 

from time to time and at all times during the said term, have the right [to be exercised by a 

notice in writing to  the permit holder(s)] to forthwith take possession and control of the 

works, plants, machinery and premises of the permit holder(s) on or in connection with the 



93 
 

 

said lands or the operations under this permit and during such possession or control, the 

permit holder(s) shall  conform to and obey all directions given by or on behalf of the  

Central or State Government regarding the use of employment of such  works, plants, 

premises and minerals, provided that fair compensation, which shall be determined in 

default of agreement by the Stale  Government shall be paid to the permit holder(s) for all 

loss or damages  sustained by him/them by reason or any consequence of the exercises of 

the powers conferred by this clause and provided also that the exercise of such powers shall 

not determine the said term hereby granted or affect the terms and provisions of these 

presents  further than may be necessary to give effect to the provisions of  this clause.  

 

 

 

PART - IV 
 

Rights of permit holder(s) 

 

It is hereby further agreed as follows:-  

 

Transfer of permit and fee payable : 

 
1
(1) [Omitted] 

 

 Preferential right of the permit holder(s) for obtaining prospecting licence or mining  lease : 

 

(2) On or before the determination of the permit, the permit holder(s) shall have a preferential 

right for  obtaining a prospecting licence or mining lease in respect of whole or part of that 

land over  any other person provided that the State Government is satisfied that  the permit 

holder(s) has/have not committed any breach of the terms  and conditions of the 

reconnaissance permit, has undertaken  reconnaissance operations to establish mineral 

resources and is otherwise a fit person for being granted the prospecting licence or mining 

lease.  

 

Refund of deposit : 

(3)  On such date within six calendar months after the  determination of the permit, as the  

State    Government shall elect after compliance by the permit holder of the provisions of  

Mineral Concession Rules, 1960, the amount then remaining  in deposit with the State 

Government  and not required to be applied to  any of the purposes in Part III of these  

presents mentioned, shall be  refunded to the permit holder(s) or if the permit holder(s) 

shall  have obtained a prospecting licence or mining lease over the said lands or any  

portion  thereof, be retained at the credit of the permit holder(s) on  account of the fees,   

rents and royalties to become payable under such licence or lease. The amount shall in no 

case carry any interest whatsoever. 

 
             Omitted by G.S.R.733 (E), dated 29.10 2002.  
 

 



94 
 

 

PART-V 

 

General Provisions 
 

It is lastly agreed as follows: 

 

Acquisition of land and compensation : 

 

(1) If after the receipt of an offer of compensation for any  damage which is likely to arise 

from the proposed operation of the  permit holder(s), the occupier of the surface of any 

part of the  said lands shall refuse his consent to the exercise of the rights and  powers 

reserved to the State Government and granted by this permit,  the permit holder(s) shall 

report the matter to the State Government  and shall deposit with it the amount offered as 

compensation and if  the State Government is satisfied that the amount of compensation 

is  reasonable or if it is not so satisfied and the permit holder(s)  shall have deposited with 

it such further amount as the State  Government may consider reasonable, the State 

Government shall order  the occupier to allow the permit holder(s) to enter upon the said  

land and carry out such operations as may be necessary for the purpose  of the permit.  In 

assessing the amount of such compensation the State  Government shall be guided by the 

principles of the Land Acquisition  Act. 

 

 Delay in fulfilment of the term of permit due to force majeure : 

 

(2) Failure on the part of the permit holder(s) to fulfil any of  the terms and conditions of this 

permit shall not give the State  Government any claim against him/her or be deemed a 

breach of the  permit insofar as such failure is considered by the State  Government to 

arise from force majeure.  

 

If the fulfilment of the permit holder(s) of any of the terms and  conditions of this permit 

be delayed from force majeure, the period  of such delay shall be added to the period fixed 

by this permit.  

 

The expression force majeure means act of God, war, insurrection,  riot, civil commotion, 

strike, tide, tidal wave, storm, flood,  lightning, explosion, fire, earthquake and any other 

happening which  the permit holder(s) could not reasonably prevent or control.  

 

Service of notices : 

 

(3)  Every notice required to be given to the permit holder(s)  shall be given in writing to such 

person as the permit holder(s) may  appoint for the purpose of receiving such notices or if 

no such  appointment is made then the notice shall be sent to the  permit holder(s) by 

registered post addressed to him/them at the  address shown in his/their application for 

the permit  at such  other address in India as he/they designate from time to time, and  

every such service shall be deemed to be proper and valid service upon  the permit 

holder(s) and shall not be questioned or challenged by  him. 

 



95 
 

 

Discovery of new minerals : 

 

(4) The permit holder(s) shall report to the State Government the  discovery of any mineral 

not specified in the permit within a period  of sixty days from the date of such discovery.  

 

Immunity of State Government from liability to pay compensation : 

 

(5) If in any event the orders of the State Government are  revised, reviewed or cancelled by 

the Central Government in pursuance  of proceedings under Chapter VII of the Mineral 

Concession Rules,  1960, the permit holder(s) shall not be entitled to compensation for  

any loss sustained by the permit holder(s) in exercise of the powers  and privileges 

conferred upon him/them by these presents.  

 

(6) The permit deed is executed at the ……………… of the State of  ……………….. (Name 

of the State) and subject to the provision of article 226 of the  Constitution of India it is 

hereby agreed upon by the permit holder(s) and the  State Government that in the event of 

any dispute in relation to the  area under reconnaissance permit and condition of the 

permit deed and in  respect of all matters touching the relationship of the permit  

holder(s)   and  the State Government, suits of petitions shall be filed in civil  courts at 

……….. (name of the city) and it is hereby expressly agreed that  neither party shall file a 

suit or appeal or bring any actions at any  place other than the courts named above. 

 

IN WITNESS WHEREOF these presents have been executed in the  manner hereunder 

appearing the day and year first above written.  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

SCHEDULE  A 
 

The land covered by the permit 

 

 (Here insert the description of lands with area, boundaries,  names of District, Sub-Division, 

Thana, etc. and cadastral survey  numbers, if any. In case a map is attached, refer the map in the  

description to be inserted.)  

 

 

SCHEDULE B 
[Under rule 7(1)(xi)] 

 

(Here specify the amount of the permit fee and  manner and time of payment.) ] 



96 
 

 

FORM G 
 

REGISTER OF APPLICATIONS FOR PROSPECTING LICENCES 

[See rule 21(1)] 

 

 

1. Serial No. 

2. Date of application of P.L. 

3. Date on which application was received by the Receiving Officer. 

4. Name of the applicant with full address. 

5. Situation and boundaries of the land applied for. 

6. Estimated area of the land. 

7. Particulars of the minerals which the applicant desired to prospect. 

8. Application fee paid. 

9. Remarks. 

10. Final disposal of the application together with number and date of the order. 

11. Signature of the Officer. 

 

 



97 
 

 

 
1
[ FORM G - 1 

 

REGISTER OF APPLICATIONS FOR RECONNAISSANCE PERMITS  
 

( See rule 7 D (1) ) 

 

1. Serial No. 

2. Date of application of Reconnaissance Permit. 

3. Date on which application was received by the Receiving Officer. 

4. Name of the applicant with full address. 

5. Situation and boundaries of the land applied for. 

6. Estimated area of the land. 

7. Particulars of the minerals which the applicant desires to prospect. 

8. Application fee paid. 

9. Remarks. 

10. Final disposal of the application together with number and date of the order. 

11. Signature of the Officer. ] 

   

 

1.  Inserted by G.S.R.No 56 (E), dated 17.1.2000. 

 



98 
 

 

 

FORM H 
 

REGISTER OF PROSPECTING LICENCES 

[See rule 21(2)] 

 

1 Serial-number. 

2. Name of the licensee. 

3. Residence with complete address of the licensee. 

4. Date of application. 

5. Date on which application was received by the Receiving Officer. 

6. Omitted. 

7. Situation and boundaries of the land. 

7A. The details of the area and the minerals in each State.  State for which the applicant 

       holds prospecting licence on the basis of information supplied by the licensee. 

8. Total area for which licence granted. 

9. (a) Number and date of grant of the licence. 

    (b) Date of execution of P.L agreement. 

10. The mineral or minerals for which prospecting licence has been granted. 

11. Period for which granted. 

12. Date and period of renewal. 

13. Application fee paid. 

14. Prospecting fee and royalty, if payable. 

15. Amount of security deposit. 

16. Particulars of disposal or refund of security deposit. 

17. Date of application for mining lease (if any). 

18. Date of assignment or transfer of licence, if any, and the name and address, of the 

      assignee/transferee. 

19. Date of expiry or relinquishment or cancellation of licence or grant of mining lease 

20. Date from which the area is available for regrant. 

21. Remarks. 

22. Signature of the Officer. 

 



99 
 

 

 

 
1
[FORM   H - 1 

 

(REGISTER OF RECONNAISSANCE PERMITS) 

 

[See rule 7 D (2)] 

 

 

 

1.           Serial number. 

2.           Name of the permit holder. 

3.           Residence with complete address of the permit holder. 

4.          Date of application. 

5.          Date on which application was received by the Receiving Officer. 

6.          Situation and boundaries of the land. 

7. The details of the area and the minerals in the State for which the applicant 
holds reconnaissance permit on the basis of information supplied by the permit 

             holder. 

8.         Total area for which permit granted. 

9.         (a) Number and date of grant of the permit. 

            (b) Date of execution of the reconnaissance permit agreement. 

10.       The mineral or minerals for which reconnaissance permit has been granted. 

11.       Period for which granted. 

12.       Application fee paid. 

13.       Permit fee paid. 

14.       Amount of security deposit. 

15.       Particulars of disposal or refund of security deposit. 

16. Date of application for prospecting licence or mining lease (if any). 
17.       Date(s) of expiry or relinquishment or cancellation of permit or 

            grant of prospecting licence or mining lease. 

18.       Date(s) of assignment or transfer of reconnaissance permit, if any, and     

            name and address of the assignee or transferee. 

19.       Date(s) from which the area is available for regrant. 

20.       Remarks. 

21.       Signature of the Officer.] 

   
1. Inserted by G.S.R.No.56 (E), dated 17.1.2000. 

 



100 
 

 

 

FORM  I 
 

 (TO BE SUBMITTED IN TRIPLICATE) 

 

Received................                                                            Government of.................. 

at..................(Place) 

on..................(date) 

Initial of Receiving Officer  

                                                                                      Application for Mining Lease   

                                                                                            (See rule 22(1) of the  

Mineral Concession Rules,1960) 

                                                                            Dated the .................... 

                                                                                day of ………… 20 ...... 

To  

-------------------------- 

-------------------------- 

 

Through: 

 

Sir,  

 

 I/We request that a mining lease under the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 

may be granted to me/us.  

 

 2. A sum of Rs. 500/- and Rs. 1,000/- being the fees in respect of this 

application and preliminary expenses respectively payable under sub-rule (3) of rule 22 

of the said rule have been deposited (vide receipt Challan 

No...................dated.............of the State Bank of India/Treasury...........................) 

 

3. The required particulars are given below: 

 

(i) Name of the applicant with complete address. 
            Status of the applicant  

 

(ii) Is the applicant a private individual/co-operative/firm/association/private 
company/ public company/public sector undertaking/joint sector undertaking or 

any other. 

 

(iii)      In case  the applicant is, - 

(a) An individual, his nationality, qualifications and experience relating to 
mining. 

(b) a company, an attested copy of the certificate of registration of the 
company shall be enclosed. 

 

(c) Omitted. 



101 
 

 

 

(d) Firm or Association, the nationality of all the partners of the firm or 
members of the association, and 

 

(e) a co-operative the nationality of non-Indian members, if any alongwith 
place of registration and a copy of the certificate of registration. 

 

(iv)     Profession or nature of business of applicant. 
 

(v)  Particulars of documents appended: 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 

               Document                            Reference 

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 

 

 (a)    Mining dues clearance certificate 

  OR 

 (b)  Affidavit in lieu of Mining Dues Clearance Certificate; subject to the    

production of mining lease dues, clearance certificate within the period 

of ninety days of making application. 

  OR 

 (c)   Affidavit when not holding any mining lease. 

 (d)   Affidavit that up-to-date Income Tax Returns as prescribed under the 

Income Tax Act, 1961 and that the tax due including the tax on  account 

of self-assessment has been paid. 

 

(vi)  Mineral or minerals which the applicant intends to mine. 

(vii)  Period for which mining lease is required. 

(viii)  Extent of the area for which mining lease is required. 

(ix)  Details of the area in respect of which mining lease is required. 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 

District   Taluqa  Village   Khasra No.   Plot No.  Area  Ownership-Occupancy 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 

 

(x)  Brief description of the area with particular reference to the following: 

(a)    Does the applicant have surface rights over the area for which he is 
        making an application for grant of a mining lease. 

(b)   If not, has he obtained the consent of the owner, and the occupier of the 
        land for undertaking mining operation. If so, the consent of the owner 

        and occupier of the land be obtained in writing and be filed. 

(xi) (a)    The situation of the area in respect of natural features such as streams or   
                        lakes. 

(b)    In the case of village areas, the name of the village, the Khasra number, 

        the area in hectares of each field or part thereof applied for. 

(c)    In case the area applied for is under forest, then the following 

        particulars be given: 



102 
 

 

 (1) Forest division, Block and Range. 

 (2) Legal status of the forest (namely reserved, protected, unclassified etc.). 

 (3) Whether it forms part of a National Park or Wild-life Sanctuary. 

 (4) Type and extent of vegetation in the area. 

(5) For areas where no forest maps or cadastral maps are available, a sketch  

plan should be submitted on scale showing the area applied for together 

with boundary, if any, of any other existing mining lease or prospecting 

licence area, if the area applied for has any common point or line with the 

boundaries of existing prospecting licence or mining lease areas. 

 

(xii)  The area applied for should be marked on plan as detailed below: 

(a) In case a cadastral Map* of the area is available, the area on this map 

should be marked showing the name of the village, Khasra number and area 

in hectares of each field and part thereof. 

(b) In the case of forest maps the area should be marked on the map showing 

the range and felling series. 

(c) In case neither cadastral nor forest maps are available, the area should be 

marked on a sketch plan drawn to scales showing on this plan all important 

surface and natural features, the dimensions of the lines forming the 

boundary of the area and the bearing and distance of all corner points from 

any important, prominent and fixed point or points. (No.1(3)/68-MII Dt. 

30.3.68) 

 

(xiii)  Particulars of the area mineral-wise in each State duly supported by an 

affidavit for which the applicant or any person joint in interest with him. 

 (a) already holds under mining lease; 

 (b) has already applied for but not granted; 

 (c) being applied for simultaneously. 

 

(xiv)  Nature of joint in interest, if any. 

 

(xv)  (a) Does the applicant hold a prospecting licence over the area mentioned at 

(xi) above? If so, give its number and date of grant and the date when it  is 

due to expire. 

(c) Has the applicant carried out the prospecting operations over the area  
held under prospecting licence and sent his report to the State 

Government, as required by rule 16 of the Mineral Concession Rules, 

1960? If not, state  reasons for not doing so. 

(xvi)  Broad parameters of the mineral/ore body/bodies. 

 (a) Strike length, average width and dip. 

 (b) Wall rocks on hanging and foot wall sides. 

(c) Whether area is considerably disturbed geologically or is comparatively 

free of geological disturbance? (copy of geological map of the area is to be 

attached.) 

(d) Reserves assessed with their grade(s)(chemical analysis reports of 

representative samples are to be attached). 



103 
 

 

(e) Whether the area is virgin? If not, the extent to which it has already been 

worked, In case there are old workings, their locations are to be shown on the 

geological map of the area. 

 

(xvii)  Broad parameters of the mine. 

 (a) Proposed date of commencement of the mining operations. 

 (b) Proposed rate of mineral production during the first 5 years (year-wise). 

 (c) Proposed rate of production when mine is fully developed. 

 (d) Anticipated life of the mine. 

 (e) Proposed method of mining (Underground or opencast) 

(i) If underground, the method of approach to the deposit mineral/ore 
       whether through inclines or shafts, 

        (ii)    If opencast, the over-burden to ore ratio and overall pit stope. 

(f) Nature of the land chosen for dumping over burden/waste and tailings 
      (that is type of land whether agricultural, grazing land, barren, saline land 

       etc.) and whether proposed site has been shown on the mine working 

       plan. Give also the extent of area in hectares set apart for dumping of 

       waste and tailings. 

 

(xviii) A report giving the details of prospecting carried out in the area together with 
assessment of the ore reserves, geological plans, results of chemical analysis 

of the representative samples, and boreholes and logs. 

 

(xix)  Manner in which the mineral raised is to be utilised. 

 (a) (i) If for captive use, the location of plant and industry. 

      (ii) For sale for indigenous consumption. 

 

 (b) If for exports to foreign countries indicate, 

(i) Names of the countries to which it is likely to be exported  where 
the mine is being set up on 100% export oriented or tied-up basis. 

       (ii)  Whether mineral will be exported in raw form or after processing. 

Also indicate the stage of processing, whether intermediate stage or 

final stage of  the end-product. 

 

 (c) If it is to be used within the country, indicate - 

       (i)  The industry/industries in which it would be used. 

(ii) Whether it will be supplied in raw form or after processing  
 (crushing/ grinding/ beneficiation/calcining). 

       (iii)  Whether it would need upgradation and if so, whether it is 

proposed to set up beneficiation plant.   Also indicate the capacity 

of such plant and the time by which it would be set up. 

 

      (d) In case of coal, or other high bulk minerals/ores details of existing  

                 railway transport facility available and additional transport facility, if  

                 any, required. 

 



104 
 

 

(xx)  Name, qualification and experience of the Technical Personnel available for 

supervising the mines. 

 

(xxi)  (i) Financial resources of the applicant. 

 (ii) Anticipated yearly financial investment during the course of mine 

               construction and aggregate investment upto the stage of commencement of  

               commercial production. 

(xxii)  (a) Nature of waste water, (e.g. whether acidic). If so, expected pH  value. 

 (b) The application form should be accompanied by a statement of the salient 

features of the scheme of  mining. This should be generally on the lines of 

the "Project at a Glance" given in a mining feasibility report including 

features relating to the protection of  environment. 

     

 I/We do hereby declare that the particulars furnished above are correct and 

am/are ready to furnish any other details including accurate plans and security deposit, 

as may be required by you. 

 

Yours faithfully, 

Place:....... 

Date:........                                   

 

Signature of the applicant 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 

 

*  The topographical map of 1"=1 mile scale is obtainable from the office of the 

Survey of India, Hathibarkhala, Dehra Dun. Detailed plan and topographical map 

are to be attached in triplicate with the original application in case mineral applied 

for is a scheduled mineral. 

 

Note 1 -  If the application is signed by an authorised agent of  the applicant, then the 

Power of Attorney should be attached. 

Note 2 - The application should relate to one compact area only, except when the 

application for mining lease is for an area already held under prospecting 

licence by the applicant. 

Note 3- Such large size map, as may be available should be attached for proper 

demarcation of the area, specially when the area applied for is 40 hectares or 

less (No.MII-152(58)/61 dt/30.4.1963). 

 

 



105 
 

 

 

 

 

“To be submitted in duplicate” 

 

FORM  J 
 

Received 

at..................(Place)                  GOVERNMENT OF 

on..................(Date)                  MODEL FORM 

Initial of Receiving          APPLICATION FOR RENEWAL OF MINING LEASE  

Officer 

     (See rule 24A) 

                                             Dated    day of    20…… 

To 

Through 

 

Sir, 

 

 I/We request for renewal of my/our mining lease under the Mineral Concession Rules, 

1960.  A sum of Rs. 500 being the application fee payable under sub-rule (3)(i)(a) of rule 22 of 

the said rules has been deposited. 

 

 2. The required particulars are given below:- 

 (i)  Name of the applicant with complete address. 

 (ii)  Is the applicant a private individual/private company/public company/  

firm or association? 

 (iii)  In case applicant is: 

              (a) an individual, his nationality, 

     (b) a company, an attested copy of the certificate of   registration  shall  

           be enclosed. 

                             (c) Omitted. 

     (d) a firm or association, the nationality of all the partners of  the firm  

           or  members of the association. 

 (iv)  Profession or nature of business of applicant. 

 (v)  (Omitted) 

 (vi)  (Omitted) 

(via)  No. and date of the valid clearance certificate of payment of mining  

 dues (copy enclosed). 

 (vii)  an affidavit, that up-to-date Income Tax returns, as prescribed under the 

Income Tax Act, 1961, have been filed, and the tax due, including the tax on 

account of self-assessment has been paid. 

 (viii) (a)  Particulars of the mining lease of which renewal is desired. 

          (b)  Details of previous renewal granted, if any. 

 (ix)  Period for which renewal of mining lease is required. 

 (x)  Whether renewal is applied for the whole or part of the leasehold. 



106 
 

 

 (xA) (a)  Does the applicant continue to have surface rights over the area of the land 

for which he requires renewal of the mining lease. 

         (b)  If not, has he obtained the consent of the owner and occupier for undertaking 

mining operations. If so, the consent of the owner and occupier of the land 

obtained in writing be filed. 

 

 (xB)  Particulars of the areas mineral-wise in each State duly supported by 

affidavit for which the applicant or any  person joint in interest with him. 

  (a) already holds under mining lease; 

  (b) has already applied for but not granted; or 

  (c) being applied for simultaneously. 

 (xC)  a mining plan which shall include- 

(a) the plan of the area showing the nature and extent of the mineral body, 

spot or spots where the excavation  is to be done in the first year and its 

extent, a detailed cross-section and detailed plan of spot(s) of excavation 

based on prospecting data gathered by the applicant, a tentative scheme of 

mining  for the first  five years of the lease; 

(b) the details of geology and lithology of the area, the extent of manual 

mining and through machines; 

  (c)  annual programme and plan for excavation for five years; and 

(d) the plan of the area showing natural water courses; limit of reserved and 

other forest areas and density of trees, assessment of impact of mining 

activity of Forest, Land surface and Environment including air and water 

pollution, and details of the scheme for afforestation, land reclamation, use 

of pollution control devices. 

 (xD)  Is the mineral going to be used in his own industry? if  so, give full details; 

(for "own industry" see Explanation under Rule 24B). 

 (xi)  In case the renewal applied for is only for part  of the lease hold: 

  (a) the area applied for renewal, 

(b) description of the area applied for renewal (description should be  

      adequate for the purpose of demarcating the plot),  

(c) particulars of map of the leasehold with area applied for renewal 

     clearly marked on it (attached), 

(d) particulars of existing or created dumps of ore, if any. 

 (xii)  Means by which the mineral is to be raised, i.e., by hand, labour or 

mechanical or electric power. 

 (xiii)  Manner in which the mineral raised is to be utilised: 

  (a) for manufacture in India, 

  (b) for exports to foreign countries, 

(c) in the former case the industries in connection with which it is required, 

should be specified. In the latter case, the countries to which the mineral will 

be exported and whether the mineral is to be exported after processing or in 

raw form should be stated. 

 (xiv)  Details of output during the last three years and phased programme for 

production during the next three years along with a layout plan for 

development, if any. 



107 
 

 

 (xv)  In case of coal, details of existing railway transport facility available and 

additional transport facility, if any, required. 

 (xvi)  Any other particulars which the applicant wishes to furnish. 

 

 

 

 I/We do hereby declare that the particulars furnished above are correct and am/are 

ready to furnish any other details, including accurate plans as required by you before the grant of 

renewal of the lease. 

 

Yours faithfully, 

 

 

Signature and designation of the applicant. 

Place: 

Date: 

 

N.B.-  If the application is signed by an authorised agent of the applicant, Power of Attorney 

should be attached. 

 



108 
 

 

FORM K 
MODEL FORM OF MINING LEASE 

(See rule 31) 

 

 THIS INDENTURE made this..................... day of............20.........between the 

Governor of................... /the President of India (hereinafter referred to as the `State Government' 

which expression shall where the context so admits be deemed to include the successors and 

assigns) of the one part and............…………………………………  

 

                        (Name of person with address and occupation)  

When the                (hereinafter referred to as “the lessee” which 

lessee is an            expression shall where the context so admits  

individual             be deemed to include his heirs, executors,  

                        administrators, representatives and permitted 

                        assigns). 

 

                        ...........…………………….(Name of person with 

When the                address and occupation) and..............……. 

lessees are             (Name of person with address and occupation) 

more than              (hereinafter referred to as "the lessee" which 

one individual          expression shall where the context so admits 

                        be deemed to include their respective heirs,  

                       executors, administrators, representatives and 

                        their permitted assigns). 

 

                        ............................ (Name and address of partner),     

                   son of..............of ………………… 

                        son of.............of.............…………. all carrying 

When the                on business in partnership. under the firm name  

lessee is               and style of....................... (name of the 

a registered           firm) registered under the Indian Partnership  

firm.                   Act, 1932 (9 of 1932) and having their registered  

                        office  at................ in the town of 

                        (hereinafter referred to as "the licensee" which 

expression where the context so admits be deemed to 

include all the said partners their respective heirs, 

executors, legal representatives and permitted assigns). 

                  

     ......................………….. (Name of company) a 

                        company registered under......................(Act  

When the                under which incorporated) and having its  

lessee is a             registered office at.................... (Address)  

registered              (hereinafter referred to as "the lessee" which  

company               expression shall where the context so admits be 

                        deemed to include its successors and permitted 

                        assigns), of the other part. 



109 
 

 

 WHEREAS THE lessee/lessees has/have applied to the State Government in 

accordance with the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960  (hereinafter referred to as the said Rules) 

for a mining lease for................ in respect of the lands described in Part I of the Schedule here 

under written and has/have deposited with the State Government the sum of Rs......................as 

security and the sum of Rs............... for meeting the preliminary expenses for a mining lease (and 

WHEREAS the Central Government has approved the grant of lease)
1
. 

 

 WITNESSETH that in consideration of the rents and royalties,covenants and 

agreements by and in these presents and the Schedule hereunder written reserved and contained 

and on the part of the lessee/lessees to be paid observed and performed, the State Government 

(with the approval of the Central Government)
1
 hereby grants and demises unto lessee/lessees. 

 

      All those the mines beds/veins seams of....................... (here state the mineral or 

minerals) (hereinafter and in the Schedule referred to as the said minerals) situated lying and 

being in or under the lands which are referred to in Part I of the said Schedule, together with the 

liberties, powers and privileges to be exercised or enjoyed in connection herewith which are 

mentioned in Part II of the said Schedule subject to the restrictions and conditions as to the 

exercise and enjoyment of such liberties, powers and privileges which are mentioned in Part III 

of the said Schedule EXCEPT and reserving out of this demise unto the State Government the 

liberties, powers and privileges mentioned in Part IV of the said Schedule TO HOLD the 

premises hereby granted and demised unto the lessee/lessees from the ..................day................... 

20.............. for the term of ................ years thence next ensuing YIELDING AND PAYING 

therefore unto the State Government the several rents and royalties mentioned in Part V of the 

said Schedule at the respective times therein specified subject to the provisions contained in Part 

VI of the said Schedule and the lessee/lessees hereby covenants/ covenant  with the State 

Government as in Part VII of the said Schedule is expressed and the State Government hereby 

covenants with the lessee/lessees as in Part VIII of the said Schedule as expressed AND it is 

hereby mutually agreed between the parties hereto as in Part IX of the said Schedule is 

expressed. 

 

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF these presents have been executed in manner hereunder 

appearing the day and year first above written.  

 

            The Schedule above referred to. 

 

 
1.  In case of minerals included in the First Schedule of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) 

Act, 1957. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



110 
 

 

 

PART I 
 

THE AREA OF THIS LEASE 
 

Location and area of the lease:- 

   

             All that tract of lands situated at ....................... (Description of area or 

areas)...............in (Pargana) in.......the Registration District of............Sub-District.............and 

Thana ………… bearing Cadestral survey Nos..............containing an area of.................or 

thereabouts delineated on the plan hereto annexed and thereon coloured…………….. and 

bounded as follows:- 

 

 On the North by 

 On the South by 

 On the East by 

 And 

 On the West by 

 hereinafter referred to as "the said lands". 

 

PART II 
 

Liberties, powers and privileges to be exercised and enjoyed by the lessee/ lessees 

subject to the restrictions and conditions in Part III. 

 

 To enter upon land and search for, win, work, etc. 

 

         1. Liberty and power at all times during the term hereby demised to enter upon the said 

lands and to search for mine, bore, dig, drill for, win, work, dress, process, convert, carry away 

and dispose of the said mineral/minerals. 

 

  To sink, drive and make pits, shafts and inclines etc.: - 

 

 2. Liberty and power for or in connection with any of the purposes mentioned in this 

part to sink drive make maintain and use in the said lands and pits shafts inclines drifts levels 

waterways airways and other works (and to use maintain deepen or extent any existing works of 

the like nature in the said lands). 

 

      To bring and use machinery equipment etc.: - 

 

       3. Liberty and power for or in connection with any of the purposes mentioned in this 

part to erect, construct, maintain and use on or under the said lands any engines, machinery, 

plant, dressing floors, furnaces, coke ovens, brick-kilns, workshops, store- houses, bungalows, 

godowns, sheds, and other buildings and other works and conveniences of the like nature on or 

under the said lands. 

 



111 
 

 

 

      To make roads and ways etc. and use existing roads and ways: - 

 

 4. Liberty and power for or in connection with any of the purposes mentioned in this 

part to make any tramways, railways, roads, aircraft landing grounds and other ways in or over 

the said lands and to use maintain and go, and repass with or without horses, cattle, wagons, 

aircrafts, locomotives, or other vehicles over the same (or any existing tramways roads and other 

ways in or over the said lands) on such conditions as may be agreed to. 

 

      To get building and road materials, etc.:- 

 

      5. Liberty and power for or in connection with any of the purposes mentioned in this 

part to quarry and get stone gravel and other building and road materials and clay and to use and 

employ the same and to manufacture such clay into bricks or tiles and to use such bricks or tiles 

but to sell any such material bricks or tiles. 

 

       To use water from streams etc:- 

 

      6. Liberty and power for or in connection with any of the purpose mentioned in this 

part but subject to the right of any existing or future lessees and with the written permission of 

Deputy Commissioner/Collector to appropriate and use water from any streams water-courses, 

springs or other sources in or upon the said lands and to divert step up or dam any such stream or 

water course and collect or impound any such water and to make construct and maintain any 

water course culverts, drains or reservoirs but not as so to deprive any cultivated lands, villages, 

buildings or watering places for livestock of a reasonable supply of water as before accustomed 

nor in any way to foul or pollute any stream or springs. Provided that the lessee/lessees shall not 

interfere with the navigation in any navigable stream nor shall divert such stream without the 

previous written permission of the State Government. 

 

          To use land for stacking, heaping, depositing purposes:- 

 

         7. Liberty and power to enter upon and use a sufficient part of -the surface of the said 

lands for the purpose of stacking, heaping, storing or depositing therein any produce of the mines 

or works carried on and any tools, equipment, earth and materials and substances dug or raised 

under the liberties and powers mentioned in this part. 

 

 Beneficiation and conveying away of production:- 

 

          8. (a) Liberty and power to enter upon and use a sufficient part of the said lands to 

beneficiate any ore produced from the said lands and to carry away such beneficiated ore. 

 

           To make coke (to be used in case of coal only):- 

 

          (b) Liberty and power upon the said lands to convert into coke any coal or coal dust 

produced from the said lands and to carry away such coke. 

 



112 
 

 

 

         To clear brushwood and to fell and utilise trees, etc.:- 

 

 

         9. Liberty and power for or in connection with any of the purposes mentioned in this 

part and subject to the existing rights of others and save as provided in clause 3 of Part III of this 

Schedule to clear undergrowth and brushwood and to fell and utilise any trees or timber standing 

or found on the said lands provided that the State Government may ask the lessee/lessees to pay 

for any trees or timber felled and utilised, by him/them at the rates specified by the Deputy 

Commissioner/Collector or the State Government.  
 

 

PART III 
 

          Restrictions and Conditions as to the exercise of the Liberties, Powers and 

Privileges in Part-II. 

        

          No building etc. upon certain places:- 

 

         1. No building or thing shall be erected, set up or placed and no surface operations 

shall be carried on in or upon any public pleasure ground, burning or burial ground or place held 

sacred by any class of persons or any house or village site, public road or other place which the 

State Government may determine as public ground nor in such a manner as to injure or 

prejudicially effect any buildings works property or rights of other persons and no land will be 

used for surface operations which is already occupied by persons other than the State 

Government for works or purposes not included in this lease. The lessee/lessees shall not also 

interfere with any right of way, well or tank. 

 

           Permission for surface operations in a land not already in use:- 

 

              2. Before using for surface operations any land which has not already been used for 

such operations, the lessee/lessees shall give to Deputy Commissioner/Collector of the District 

two calendar months previous notice in writing specifying the name or other description of the 

situation and the extent of the land proposed to be so used and the purpose for which the same is 

required and the said land shall not be so used if objection is issued by the Deputy 

Commissioner/Collector within two months after the receipt by him of such notice unless the 

objections so stated shall on reference to the State Government be annulled or waived. 

 

                To cut trees in unreserved lands: - 

 

             3. The lessee/lessees shall not without the express sanction of the Deputy 

Commissioner/Collector cut down or injure any timber or trees on the said lands but may without 

such sanction clear away any brushwood or undergrowth which interferes with any operations 

authorised by these presents. The Deputy Commissioner/Collector or the State Government may 

require the lessee/lessees to pay for any trees or timber felled and utilised by him/them at the 

rates specified by the Deputy Commissioner/Collector of the District. 

 



113 
 

 

 

                To enter upon reserved forests:- 

 

              4. Notwithstanding anything in this Schedule contained the lessee/lessees shall not 

enter upon any reserved forest included in the said lands without previous sanction in writing of 

the District Forest Officer nor fell, cut and use any timber or trees without obtaining the sanction 

in writing of that Officer nor otherwise than in accordance with such conditions as the State 

Government may prescribe. 

 

                No mining operations within 50 metres of public works etc.:- 

 

             5. The lessee/lessees shall not work or carry on or allow to be worked or carried on any 

mining operations at or to any point within a distance of 50 metres from any railway line except 

with the previous written permission of the Railway Administration concerned or under or 

beneath any rope way or any ropeway trestle or station, except under and in accordance with the 

written permission of the authority owning the ropeway or from any reservoir, canal or other 

public works such as public roads and buildings or inhabited site except with the previous 

written permission of the Deputy Commissioner/Collector or any other officer authorised by the 

State Government in this behalf and otherwise than in accordance with such instructions, 

restrictions and conditions either general or special which may be attached to such permission. 

The said distance of 50 metres shall be measured in the case of railway, reservoir or canal 

horizontally from the outer toe of the bank or the outer edge of the cutting as the case may be and 

in case of a building horizontally from the plinth thereof. In the case of village roads no working 

shall be carried on within a distance of  10 metres of the outer edge of the cutting except with the 

previous permission of the Deputy Commissioner/Collector or any other officer duly authorised 

by the State Government in this behalf and otherwise than in accordance with such directions, 

restrictions and additions, either general or special, which may be attached to such permission. 

 

                Explanation:- For the purposes of this clause the expression ‘Railway Administration’ 

shall have the same meaning as it is defined to have in the Indian Railways Act. 1890, by clause 

(6) of section 3 of that Act. `Public Road' shall mean a road which has been constructed by 

artificially surfaced as distinct from a track resulting from repeated use. Village road will include 

any track shown in the Revenue record as village road. 

 

               Facilities for adjoining Government licences and leases:- 

 

            6. The lessee/lessees shall allow existing and future holders of Government licences or 

leases over any land which is comprised in or adjoins or is reached by the land held by the 

lessee/lessees reasonable facilities of access thereto: 

 

              PROVIDED THAT no substantial hindrance or interference shall be caused by such 

holders of licences or leases to the operations of the lessee/lessees under these presents and fair 

compensation (as may be mutually agreed upon or in the event of disagreement as may be 

decided by the State Government) shall be made to the lessee/lessees for loss or damage 

sustained by the lessee/lessees by reason of the exercise of this liberty. 

 



114 
 

 

 

 

 

 

PART IV 
 

Liberties, Powers and Privileges reserved to the State Government 

              

 To work other minerals:- 

 

              1. Liberty and power for the State Government, or to any lessee or persons authorised 

by it in that behalf to enter into and upon the said lands and to search for, win, work, dig, get, 

raise, dress, process, convert and carry away minerals other than the said minerals and any other 

substances and for those purposes to sink, drive, make erect, construct, maintain and use such 

pits, shafts,inclines, drifts, levels and other lines, waterways, airways, water courses, drains, 

reservoirs, engines, machinery, plant, buildings, canals, tramways, railways, roadways and other 

works and conveniences as may be deemed necessary or convenient. 

 

              PROVIDED THAT in the exercise of such liberty and power no substantial hindrance 

or interference shall be caused to or with the liberties, powers and privileges of the lessee/lessees 

under these presents and that fair compensation (as may be mutually agreed upon or in the event 

of disagreement as may be decided by the State Government) shall be made to the lessee/lessees 

for all loss or damage sustained by the lessee/lessees by reason or in consequence of the exercise 

of such liberty and power. 

 

               To make railways and roads: - 

 

                2. Liberty and power for the State Government or any lessee or person authorised by it 

in that behalf to enter into and upon the said lands and to make upon over or through the same 

any railways, tramways, roadways or pipelines for any purpose other than those mentioned in 

Part II of these presents and to get from the said lands, stones, gravel, earth and other materials 

for making, maintaining and repairing such railways, tramways and roads or any existing 

railways and roads and to and repass at all times with or without horses, cattle or other animals, 

carts, wagons, carriages, locomotives or other vehicles over or along any such railways, 

tramways, road lines and other ways for all purposes and as occasion may require, provided that 

in the exercise of such liberty and power by such other lessee or person no substantial hindrance 

or interference shall be caused to or with the liberties, powers and privileges of the lessee/lessees 

under these presents and that fair compensation as may be mutually agreed upon or in the event 

of disagreement as may be decided by the State Government shall be made to the lessee/lessees 

for all loss or damage substantial hindrance or interference shall be caused to or with the exercise 

by such lessee or person of such liberty and power. 

 

 

 

 

 



115 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

PART V 

 

Rents and royalties reserved by this lease 
 

  To pay dead rent or royalty whichever is higher: - 

 

          1.The lessee shall pay, for every year except the first year of the lease, dead rent as 

specified in clause 2 of this Part: 

 

 Provided that, where the holder of such mining lease becomes liable under section 9 of 

the Act, to pay royalty for any mineral removed or consumed by him or by his agent, manager, 

employee, contractor or sub-lessee from the leased area, he shall be liable to pay either such 

royalty or the dead rent in respect of that area, whichever is higher. 

 

            Rate and mode of payment of dead rent.- 

 

             2. Subject to the provisions of clause 1 of this Part, during the subsistence of the lease, 

the lessee/lessees shall pay to the State Government annual dead rent for the lands demised and 

described in Part I of this Schedule at the rate for the time being specified in the Third Schedule 

to the Act, in such manner as may be specified in this behalf by the State Government. 

 

             Rate and mode of payment of royalty:- 

 

             3. Subject to the provision of clause 1 of this part, the lessee/lessees shall during the 

subsistence of this lease pay to the State Government at such times and in such manner as the 

State Government may prescribe royalty in respect of any mineral/minerals removed by 

him/them from the leased area at the rate for the time being specified in the Second Schedule to 

the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957. 

 

               Payment of surface rent, and water rate:- 

 

                4. The lessee/lessees shall pay rent and water rate to the State Government in respect of 

all parts of the surface of the said lands which shall from time to time be occupied or used by the 

lessee/lessees under the authority of these presents at the rate of Rs........ and Rs.......... 

respectively per annum per hectare of the area so occupied or used and so in proportion for any 

area less than a hectare during the period from the commencement of such occupation or used 

until the area shall cease to be so occupied or used and shall as far as possible restore the surface 

land so used to its original condition. Surface rent and water rate shall be paid as hereinbefore 

detailed in clause 2 : PROVIDED THAT NO such rent/water rate shall be payable in respect of 

the occupation and use of the area comprised in any roads or ways to which the public have full 

right of access. 

 



116 
 

 

 

 

 

 

PART VI 
 

Provisions relating to the rents and royalties 
 

    Rent and royalties to be free from deduction etc.:- 

 

     1. The rent, water rate and royalties mentioned in Part V of this Schedule shall be paid 

free from any deductions to the State Government at .......... and such manner as the State 

Government may prescribe. 

  

 PROVIDED ALWAYS and it is hereby agreed that Rs ................. the balance standing 

to the credit of the lessee/lessees on account of the deposit made by him/them as a 

licensee/licensees over an area which included the said lands shall be retained and accepted by 

the State Government in satisfaction of the rents and royalties mentioned in Part V until they 

reach that amount. 

 

                Mode of computation of royalty:- 

 

               2. For the purposes of computing the said royalties the lessee/lessees shall keep a 

correct account of them mineral/minerals produced and despatched. The accounts as well as the 

weight of the mineral/minerals in stock or in the process of export may be checked by an officer 

authorised by the Central or State Government.  Here specify the mode of arriving at sale 

price/prices at pits mouth of mineral/minerals. 

 

                Course of action if rents and royalties are not paid in time :- 

 

                 3. Should any rent, royalty or other sums due to the State Government under the terms 

and conditions of these presents be not paid by the lessee/lessees within the prescribed time the 

same, together with simple interest due thereon at the rate of twenty-four per cent per annum 

may be recovered on a certificate of such officer as may be specified by the State Government by 

general or special order, in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue. 

 

 

PART VII 
 

The Covenants of the Lessee/Lessees 
 

 Lessee to pay rents and royalties, taxes, etc.:- 

 

 1. The lessee/lessees shall pay the rent, water rate and royalties reserved by this lease 

at such times and in the manner provided in PARTS V and VI of these presents and shall also 

pay and discharge all taxes, rates, assessments and impositions whatsoever being in the nature of 



117 
 

 

public demands which shall from time to time be charged, assessed or imposed by the authority 

of the Central and State Governments upon or in respect of the premises and works of the 

lessee/lessees in common with other premises and works of a like nature except demands for 

land revenues. 

 

 

To maintain and keep boundary marks in good order:- 

 

 2. The lessee/lessees shall at his/their own expense erect and at all times maintain and 

keep in repair boundary marks and pillars according to the demarcation to be shown in the plan 

annexed to this lease. Such marks and pillars shall be sufficiently clear of the shrubs and other 

obstructions as to allow easy identification. 

 

 To commence operations within two years and work in a workman-like manner:- 

 

 3. The lessee/lessees shall commence operation within two years from the date of 

execution of the lease and shall thereafter at all times during the continuance of his lease search 

for, win, work and develop, the said minerals without voluntary intermission in a skilful and 

workman-like manner and as prescribed under clause 12 hereinafter without doing or permitting 

to be done any unnecessary or avoidable damage to the surface of the said lands or the crops 

buildings structures or other property thereon. For the purposes of this clause operations shall 

include the erection of  machinery, laying of a tramway or construction of a road in connection 

with the mine. 

 

 To indemnify Government against all claims:- 

 

 4. The lessee/lessees shall make and pay such reasonable satisfaction and 

compensation as may be assessed by lawful authority in accordance with the law force on the 

subject for all damage, injury or disturbance which may be done by him/them in exercise of the 

powers granted by this lease and shall indemnify and keep indemnified fully and completely the 

State Government against all claims which may be made by any person or persons in respect of 

any such damage, injury or disturbance and all costs and expenses in connection therewith. 

 

 To secure and keep in good condition pits, shafts, etc.:- 

 

 5. The lessee/lessees shall during the subsistence of this lease well and sufficiently 

secure and keep open with timber or other durable means all pits, shafts and workings that may 

be made or used in the said lands and make and maintain sufficient fences to the satisfaction of 

the State Government round every such pit, shaft or working whether the same is abandoned or 

not and shall during the same period keep all workings in the said lands except such as may be 

abandoned accessible free from water and foul air as far as possible. 

 

 To strengthen and support the mine to necessary extent: - 

 

 6. The lessee/lessees shall strengthen and support to the satisfaction of the Railway 

Administration concerned or the State Government, as the case may be any part of the mine 



118 
 

 

which in its opinion requires such strengthening or support for the safety of any railway, 

reservoir, canal, road and any other public works or structures. 

 

 To allow inspection of workings: - 

 

 7. The lessee/lessees shall allow any officer authorised by the Central Government or 

the State Government in that behalf to enter upon the premises including any building, 

excavation or land comprised in the lease for the purpose of inspecting, examining, surveying, 

prospecting and making plans thereof sampling and collecting any data and the lessee/lessees 

shall with proper person employed by the lessee/lessees and acquainted with the mines and work 

effectually assist such officer, agents, servants and workmen in conducting every such inspection 

and shall afford them all facilities, information connected with the working of the mines which 

they may reasonably require and also shall and will conform to and observe all orders and 

regulations which the Central and State Governments as the result of such inspection or 

otherwise may, from time to time, see fit to impose. 

 

 To report accident:- 

 

 8. The lessee/lessees shall without delay send to the Deputy Commissioner/ Collector a 

report of any accident causing death or serious bodily injury or serious injury to property or 

seriously affecting or endangering life or property which may occur in the course of the 

operations under this lease. 

 

 To report discovery of other minerals:- 

 

 9.The lessee/lessees shall report to the State Government the discovery in the leased 

area of any mineral not specified in the lease within sixty days of such discovery along with full 

particulars of the nature and position of each such find. If any mineral not specified in the lease 

is discovered in the leased area, the lessee/lessees shall not win and dispose of such mineral 

unless such mineral is included in the lease or a separate lease is obtained therefor. 

 

 To keep records and accounts regarding production and employees etc.:- 

 

 10. The lessee/lessees shall at all time during the said term keep or cause to be kept at 

an office to be situated upon or near the said lands correct and intelligible books of accounts 

which shall contain accurate entries showing from time to time:- 

 

(1) Quantity and quality of the said mineral/minerals realised from the said lands. 
(2) Quantity of the various qualities of ores beneficiated or converted (for example 

coal converted into coke). 

(3) Quantities of the various qualities of the said mineral/minerals sold and exported 
separately. 

(4) Quantities of the various qualities of the said mineral/minerals otherwise disposed 
of and the manner and purpose of such disposal. 

(5) The prices and all other particulars of all sales of said mineral/minerals. 



119 
 

 

(6) The number of persons employed in the mines or works or upon the said lands 
specifying nationality, qualifications and pay of the technical personnel. 

(7) Such other facts particulars and circumstances as the Central or the State       
Governments may from time to time require and shall also furnish free of charge 

to such officers and at such times as the Central and State Governments may 

appoint true and correct abstract of all or any such books of accounts and such 

information and returns to all or any of the matters aforesaid as the State 

Government may prescribe and shall at all reasonable times allow such officers as 

the Central Government or State Government shall in that behalf  appoint to enter 

into and have free access to the said officers for the purpose of examining and 

inspecting the said books of accounts, plans and records and to make copies 

thereof and make extracts therefrom. 

 

 To maintain plans, etc:- 

 

 11. The lessee/lessees shall at all times during the said term maintain at the mine office 

correct intelligible up-to-date and complete plans and sections of the mines in the said lands. 

They shall show all the operations, and workings and all the trenches, pits and drillings made by 

him/them in the course of operations carried on by him/them under the lease, faults and other 

disturbances encountered and geological data and all such plans and sections shall be amended 

and filled up by and from actual surveys to be made for that purpose at the end of twelve months 

or any period specified from time to time and the lessee/lessees shall furnish free of charge to the 

Central and State Governments true and correct copies of such plans and sections whenever 

required. Accurate records of all trenches, pits and drillings shall show: - 

 

 (a)  The subsoil and strata through which they pass. 

 (b)  Any mineral encountered. 

 (c)  Any other matter of interest and all data required by the Central and State 

Governments, from time to time. 

 

 The lessee/lessees shall allow any officer of the Central or the State Government, 

authorised in this behalf by the Central Government, to inspect the same at all reasonable times. 

He/they shall also supply when asked for by the State Government/the Coal Controller the 

Director General, Geological Survey of India, the Controller General, Indian Bureau of Mines a 

composite plan of the area showing thickness dip, inclination, etc. of all the seams as also the 

quantity of reserves quality-wise. 

 

 11A. The lessee shall pay a wage not less than the minimum wage prescribed by the 

Central or State Government from time to time. 

 

 11B. The lessee shall comply with provisions of the Mines Act, 1952 and the rules 

made thereunder. 

 

 11C. The lessee shall take measures for the protection of  environment like planting of 

trees, reclamation of land, use of  pollution control devices; and such other measures as may be 

prescribed by the Central or State Government, from time to time, at his own expense. 



120 
 

 

 

 11D. The lessee shall pay compensation to the occupier of the land on the date and in 

the manner laid down in these rules. 

 11E. The lessee shall, in the matter of employment, give preference to the tribals and to 

the persons who become displaced-because of the taking up of mining operations. 

 

 Act 67 of 1957:- 

 

 12.The lessee/lessees shall be bound by such rules as may be issued from time to time 

by the Government of India under section 18 of the Mines and Minerals (Development and 

Regulation) Act, 1957 (Act 67 of 1957) and shall not carry on mining or other operations under 

the said lease in any way other than as prescribed under these rules. 

 

 To provide weighing machine:- 

 

 13.Unless specifically exempted by the State Government the lessee/lessees shall 

provide and at all times keep at or near the pit head or each of the pit heads at which the said 

minerals shall be brought to bank a properly constructed and efficient weighing machine and 

shall weigh or cause to be weighed thereon all the said minerals, from time to time, brought to 

bank, sold, exported and converted and also the converted products and shall at the close of each 

day cause the total weights, ascertained by such means of the said minerals, ores products raised, 

sold, exported and converted during the previous twenty- four hours to be entered in the 

aforesaid books of accounts. The lessee/lessees shall permit the State Government at all times 

during the said term to employ any person or persons to be present at the weighing of the said 

minerals as aforesaid and to keep accounts thereof and to check the accounts kept by the 

lessee/lessees. The lessee/lessees shall give..... days previous notice in writing to the Deputy 

Commissioner/Collector of every such measuring or weighing in order that he or some officer on 

his behalf may be present thereat. 

 

 To allow test of weighing machine:- 

 

 14. The lessee/lessees shall allow any person or persons appointed in that behalf by the 

State Government at any time or times during the said term to examine and test every weighing 

machine to be provided and kept as aforesaid and the weights used therewith in order to ascertain 

whether the same respectively are correct and in good repair and order and if upon any such 

examination or testing any such weighing machine or weights shall be found incorrect or out of 

repair or order the State Government may require that the same be adjusted, repaired and put in 

order by and at the expense of the  lessee/lessees and if such requisition be not complied with 

within fourteen days after the same shall have been made, the State Government may cause such 

weighing machine or weights to be adjusted, repaired, and put in order and the expense of so 

doing shall be paid by the lessee/lessees to the State Government on demand and if upon any 

such examination or testing as aforesaid any error shall be discovered in any weighing machine 

or weights to the prejudice of the State Government such error shall be regarded as having 

existed for three calendar months, previous to the discovery thereof or from the last occasion of 

so examining and testing the same weighing machine and weights in case such occasion be 



121 
 

 

within such period of three months and the said rent and royalty shall be paid and accounted for 

accordingly. 

 

 To pay compensation for injury of third parties:- 

 

 15. The lessee/lessees shall make and pay reasonable satisfaction and compensation for 

all damage, injury or disturbance or person or property which may be done by or on the part of 

lessee/lessees in exercise of the liberties and power granted by these presents and shall at all 

times save harmless and keep indemnified the State Government from and against all suits. 

claims and demands which may be brought or made by any person or persons in respect of any 

such damage, injury or disturbance. 

 

 Not to obstruct working of other minerals:- 

 

 16. The lessee/lessees will exercise the liberties and powers hereby granted in such a 

manner as to offer no unnecessary or reasonably avoidable obstruction or interruption to the 

development and working within the said lands of any minerals not included in this lease and 

shall at all times afford to the Central and State Government and to the holders of prospecting 

licences or mining leases in respect of any such minerals or any minerals within any land 

adjacent to the said lands as the case may be reasonable means of access and safe and convenient 

passage upon and across the said lands to such minerals for the purpose of getting working, 

developing and carrying away the same provided that the lessee/lessees shall receive reasonable 

compensation for any damage or injury which he/they may sustain by reason or in consequence 

of the use of such passage by such lessees or holders of prospecting licences. 

 

 Transfer of lease:- 

 

 17.(1) The lessee/lessees shall not, without the previous consent in writing of the State 

Government, Omitted  

 

(a) assign, sublet, mortgage, or in any other manner, transfer the mining lease, or 
any right, title or interest therein, or  

(b) enter into or make any arrangement, contract or understanding whereby the 
lessee/lessees will or may be directly or indirectly financed to a substantial 

extent by, or under which the lessee's operations or undertakings will or may 

be substantially controlled by, any person or body of persons other than the 

lessee/lessees: 

 

 Provided that the State Government shall not give its written consent unless- 

 

(a) the lessee has furnished an affidavit along with his application for transfer of 
the mining lease specifying therein the amount that he has already taken or 

proposes to take as consideration from the transferee; 

(b) the transfer of the mining lease is to be made to a person or body directly 
undertaking mining operations. 

 



122 
 

 

 (2) Without prejudice to the above provisions the lessee/lessees may, subject to the 

conditions specified in the proviso to Rule 35 of  said Rules, transfer this lease or any right, title 

or interest therein, to a person who has filed an affidavit stating that he has filed up-to-date 

income tax returns, paid income tax assessed on him and paid the income tax on the basis of self-

assessment as provided in the Income Tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), on payment of five hundred 

rupees to the State Government:  

 

 Provided that the lessee/lessees shall make available to the transferee the original or 

certified copies of all plans of abandoned workings in the area and in a belt 65 metres wide 

surrounding it.  

 

 Provided further that where the mortgagee is an Institution or a Bank or a Corporation 

specified in Schedule V, it shall not be necessary for any such Institution or Bank or Corporation 

to meet with the requirement relating to income tax and the said valid clearance certificate. 

 

 (3) The State Government, may by order in writing, determine the lease at any time if 

the lessee/lessees has/have in the opinion of the State Government, committed a breach of any of 

the above provisions or has/have transferred the lease or any right, title or interest therein 

otherwise than in accordance with clause (2) : 

 

 Provided that no such order shall be made without giving the lessee/lessees a 

reasonable opportunity of stating his/their case. 

 

 Not to be financed or controlled by a Trust, Corporation, Firm or person:- 

 

 18.The lease shall not be controlled and the lessee/lessees shall not allow themselves to 

be controlled by any Trust, Syndicate, Corporation, Firm or person except with the written 

consent of the Central Government. The lessee/lessees shall not enter into or make any 

arrangement compact or understanding whereby the lessee/lessees will or may be directly or 

indirectly financed by or under which the lessee's/lessees' operations or undertakings will or may 

be carried on directly or indirectly by or for the benefit of or subject to the control of any Trust, 

Syndicate, Corporation, Firm or person unless with the written sanction given prior to such 

arrangement compact or understanding being entered into or made of the Central Government 

and any or every such arrangement compact or understanding as aforesaid (entered into or made 

with such sanction as aforesaid) shall only be entered into or made and shall always be subject to 

an express condition binding upon the other party or parties thereto that on the occasion of a state 

of emergency of which the President of India in his discretion shall be the sole judge it shall be 

terminable if so required in writing by the State Government and shall in the event of  any such 

requisition being made be forthwith thereafter determined by the lessee/lessees accordingly. 

 

 

 

 

 Lessee shall deposit any additional amount necessary:- 

 



123 
 

 

 19. Whenever the security deposit of Rs.2,000 / 1,000 or any part thereof or any further 

sum hereafter deposited with the State Government in replenishment thereof shall be forfeited or 

applied by the Central or State Government pursuant to the power in hereinafter declared in that 

behalf the lessee/lessees shall deposit with the State Government such further sum as may be 

sufficient with the unappropriated part thereof to bring the amount in deposit with the State 

Government up to the sum of Rs. 1,000 / 500.  

  

 

 Delivery of workings in good order to State Governments after determination of lease: 

- 

 

 20.The lessee/lessees shall at the expiration or sooner determination of the said term or 

any renewal thereof deliver up to the State Government all mines, pits, shafts, inclines, drifts, 

levels, water ways, airways and other works now existing or hereafter to be sunk or made on or 

under the said lands except such as have been abandoned with the sanction of the State 

Government and in any ordinary and fair course of working all engines, machinery, plant, 

buildings, structures, other works and conveniences which at the commencement of the said term 

were upon or under the said lands and all such machinery set up by the lessee/lessees below 

ground which cannot be removed without causing injury to the mines or works under the said 

lands (except such of the same as may with the sanction of the State Government have become 

disused) and all buildings and structures of bricks or stone erected by the lessee/lessees above 

ground level in good repair order and condition and fit in all respects for further working of the 

said mines and the said minerals. 

 

 Right of pre-emption:- 

 

 21 .(a) The State Government shall from time to time and all times during the said term 

have the right (to be exercised by notice in writing to the lessee/lessees) of pre-emption of the 

said minerals (and all products thereof) lying in or upon the said lands hereby demised or 

elsewhere under the control of the lessee/lessees and the lessee/lessees shall with all possible 

expedition deliver all minerals or products or minerals purchased by the State Government under 

the power conferred by this provision in the quantities at the times in manner and at the place 

specified in the notice exercising the said right. 

 

 (b) Should the right of pre-emption conferred by this present provision be exercised 

and a vessel chartered to carry the minerals or products thereof procured on behalf of the State 

Government or the Central Government be detained on demurrage at the port of loading the 

lessee/lessees shall pay the amount due for demurrage according to the terms of the charter party 

of such vessel unless the State Government shall be satisfied that the delay, is due to causes 

beyond the control of the lessee/lessees. 

 

 (c) The price to be paid for all minerals or products of  minerals taken in pre-emption 

by the State Government in exercise of  the right hereby conferred shall be the fair market price 

prevailing at the time of pre-emption PROVIDED THAT in order to assist in arriving at the said 

fair market price the lessee/lessees shall if so required furnish to the State Government for the 

confidential information of the Government, particularly of the quantities, descriptions and 



124 
 

 

prices of the said minerals or products thereof sold to other customers and of charters entered 

into for freight, for carriage of the same and shall produce to such officer or officers as may be 

directed by the State Government original or authenticated copies of contracts and charter parties 

entered into for the sale or freightage of such minerals or products. 

 

 (d) In the event of the existence of a state of war or emergency (of which existence and 

President of India shall be the sole judge and a notification to this effect in the Gazette of India 

shall be conclusive proof), the State Government with the consent of the Central Government 

shall from time to time and all times during the said term have the right (to be exercised by a 

notice in writing to the lessee/lessees forthwith take possession and control of the works plant 

machinery and premises of the lessee/lessees on or in connection with the said lands or 

operations under this lease and during such possession or control the lessee/lessees shall conform 

to and obey all directions given by or on behalf of the Central Government or State Government 

regarding the use or employment of such works, plants, premises and minerals: PROVIDED 

THAT fair compensation which shall be determined in default of agreement by the State 

Government shall be paid to the lessee/lessees for all loss or damage sustained by him/them by 

reason or in consequence of the exercise of  the powers conferred by this clause and PROVIDED 

ALSO that the exercise of such powers shall not determine the said term hereby granted or affect 

the terms and provisions of these presents further than may be necessary to give effect to the 

provisions of this clause. 

 

 Employment of foreign national:- 

 

 22. The lessee/lessees shall not employ, in connection with the mining operations any 

person who is not an Indian national except with the previous approval of the Central 

Government. 

 

 Recovery of expenses incurred by the State Government:- 

 

 23. If any of the works or matters which in accordance with the covenants in that 

behalf hereinbefore contained are to be carried or performed by the lessee/lessees be not so 

carried out or performed within the time specified in that behalf, the State Government may 

cause the same to be carried out or performed and the lessee/lessees shall pay the State 

Government on demand all expenses which shall be incurred in such carrying out or performance 

of the same and the decision of the State Government as to such expenses shall be final. 

 

 Furnishing of geophysical data:- 

 

 24. The lessee/lessees shall furnish: 

 

(a) all geophysical data relating to mining fields, or engineering and ground Water 
surveys, such as anomaly maps, sections, plans, structures, contour maps, logging, 

collected by him/them during the course of  mining operations to the Director-

General, Geological Survey of India, Calcutta. 



125 
 

 

(b) all information pertaining to investigations of  radioactive minerals collected by 
him/them during course of mining operations to the Secretary, Department of  

Atomic Energy, New Delhi. 

 

 Data or information referred to above shall be furnished every year reckoned from the 

date of commencement of the period of the mining lease. 

 

PART VIII 
 

The Covenants of the State Government  
 

 Lessee/lessees may hold and enjoy rights quietly :- 

 

 1. The lessee/lessees paying the rents, water rate and royalties hereby reserved and 

observing and performing all the covenants and agreements herein contained and on the part of 

the lessee/lessees to be observed and performed shall and may quietly hold and enjoy the rights 

and premises hereby demised for and during the term hereby granted without any unlawful 

interruption from or by the State Government, or any person rightfully claiming under it. 

 

 Acquisition of land of third parties and compensation thereof :- 

 

 2. If in accordance with the provision of clause 4 of Part VII of  this Schedule the 

lessee/lessees shall offer to pay to an occupier of  the surface of any part of the said lands 

compensation for any damage or injury which may arise from the proposed operations of the 

lessee/lessees and the said occupier shall refuse his consent to the exercise of the right and 

powers reserved to the State Government and demised to the lessee/lessees by these presents and 

the lessee/lessees shall report the matter to the State Government and shall deposit with it the 

amount offered as compensation and if the Central/State Government is satisfied that the amount 

of compensation offered is fair and reasonable or if it is not so satisfied and the lessee/lessees 

shall have deposited with it such further amount as the State and Central Government shall 

consider fair and reasonable the State Government shall order the occupier to allow the 

lessee/lessees to enter the land and to carry out such operations as may be necessary for the 

purpose of this lease. In assessing the amount of such compensation the State Government shall 

be guided by the principles of  the Land Acquisition Act.  

 

 To renew:- 

 

 3. The mining lease is renewable in terms of the provisions of  the Act and the rules 

made thereunder.  

 

 Provided that the State Government may for reasons to be recorded in writing reduce 

the area applied for.   

 

 If the lease is in respect of minerals specified in the First Schedule to the Act, renewal 

will be subject to the prior approval of  the Central Government. 

 



126 
 

 

     If the lessee/lessees be desirous of taking a renewed lease of  the premises hereby 

demised or of any parts of them for a further term from the expiration of the term hereby granted 

and is otherwise eligible, they shall prior to expiration of the last mentioned term give to the 

State Government twelve calendar months previous notice in writing and shall pay the rent, rates 

and royalties hereby reserved and shall observe and perform the several covenants and 

agreements herein contained and on the part of the lessee/lessees to be observed and performed 

up to the expiration of the term hereby granted. The State Government on receipt of application 

for renewal, shall consider it in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the rules made 

thereunder and shall pass orders as it deems fit. If  renewal is granted, the State Government will 

at the expense of the lessee/lessees and upon his executing and delivering to the State 

Government if required a counterpart thereof execute and deliver to the lessee/lessees a renewed 

lease of the said premises or part thereof for the further term of ............. years at such rents, rates 

and royalties and on such terms and subject to such rents, rates and royalties and on such terms 

and subject to such covenants and agreements, including this present covenant to renew as shall 

be in accordance with the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960, applicable to............................(name 

of minerals) on the day next following the expiration of the term hereby granted. 

 

 Liberty to determine the lease:- 

 

 4. The lessee/lessees may at any time determine this lease by giving not less than 12 

calendar months notice in writing to the State Government or to such officer, or authority as the 

State Government may specify in this behalf and upon the expiration of such notice provided that 

the lessee/lessees shall upon such expiration render and pay all rents, water rates, royalties, 

compensation for damages and other moneys which may then be due and payable under these 

presents to the lessor or any other person or persons and shall deliver these presents to the State 

Government then this lease and the said term and the liberties, powers and privileges hereby 

granted shall absolutely cease and determine but without prejudice to any right or remedy of  the 

lessor in respect of any breach of any of the covenants or agreements contained in these presents. 

 

 4A. The State Government may on an application made by the lessee permit him to 

surrender one or more minerals from his lease which is for a group of minerals on the ground 

that deposits of that mineral have since exhausted or depleted to such an extent that it is no 

longer possible to work the mineral economically, subject to the condition that the lessee- 

 

(a) Makes an application for such surrender of mineral at least six months before 
the intended date of  surrender; and 

(b) Gives an undertaking that he will not cause any hindrance in the working of 
the mineral surrendered by any other person who is subsequently granted a 

mining lease for that mineral. 

 

 Refund of security deposits:- 

 

 5. On such date as the State Government may elect within 12 calendar months after the 

determination of this lease or of any renewal thereof, the amount of the security deposit paid in 

respect of this lease and then remaining in deposit with the State Government and not required to 



127 
 

 

be applied to any of the purposes mentioned in this lease shall be refunded to the lessee/lessees. 

No interest shall run on the security deposit. 

 

 

 

PART IX 

 

General Provisions 

 

 Obstructions to inspection :- 

 

 1. In case the lessee/lessees or his/their transferee/assignee does/do not allow entry or 

inspection by the officers authorised by the Central or State Government under clauses (i), (j) or 

(1) of sub-rule (1) of rule 27 of said Rules, the State Government shall give notice in writing to 

the lessee/lessees requiring him/them to show cause within such time as may be specified in the 

notice why the lease should not be determined and his/their security deposit forfeited; and if the 

lessee/lessees fails/fail to show cause within the aforesaid time to the satisfaction of the State 

Government, the State Government may determine the lease and forfeit the whole or part of the 

security deposit. 

 

     Penalty in case of default in payment of royalty and breach of  covenants:- 

 

 2. If the lessee/lessees or his / their transferee or assignee makes/make any default in 

payment of rent or water rate or royalty as required by section 9 of the Act or commits a breach 

of any of the conditions and convenants other than those referred to in covenant 1 above, the 

State Government shall give notice to the lessee/lessees requiring him/them to pay the rent, water 

rate, royalty or remedy the breach, as the case may be, within sixty days from the date of receipt 

of the notice and if the rent, water rate and royalty are not paid or the breach is not remedied 

within such period, the State Government without prejudice to any proceedings that may be 

taken against him/them, determine the lease and forfeit the whole or part of the security deposit. 

 

     Penalty for repeated breaches of covenants:- 

 

 3. In cases of repeated breaches of covenants and agreements by the lessee/ lessees for 

which notice has been given by the State Government in accordance with clauses (1) and (2) 

aforementioned on earlier occasion, the State Government without giving any further notice, may 

impose such penalty not exceeding twice the amount of  annual dead rent specified in clause 2, 

Part V.  

 

 Failure to fulfil the terms of leases due to "Force Majeure":- 

 

 4. Failure on the part of the lessee/lessees to fulfil any of the terms and conditions of 

this lease shall not give the Central or State Government any claim against the lessee/lessees or 

be deemed a breach of this lease, in so far as such failure is considered by the said Government 

to arise from force majeure, and if through force majeure the fulfilment by the lessee/lessees of 

any of the terms and conditions of this lease be delayed, the period of such delay shall be added 



128 
 

 

to the period fixed by this lease. In this clause the expression "Force Majeure" means act of God, 

war, insurrection, riot, civil commotion, strike, earth quake, tide, storm, tidal wave, flood, 

lightning, explosion, fire, earthquake and any other happening which the lessee/lessees could not 

reasonably prevent or control. 

 

    Lessee/lessees to remove his/their properties on the expiry of  lease:- 

 

 5. The lessee/lessees having first paid discharged rents, rates and royalties payable by 

virtue of these presents may at the expiration or sooner determination of the said term or within 

six calendar months thereafter (unless the lease shall be determined under clauses 1 and 2 of this 

Part and in that case at any time not less than three calendar months nor more than six calendar 

months after such determination) take down and remove for his/their own benefit all or any 
1
[ore 

mineral excavated during the currency of lease] engines, machinery, plant, buildings structures, 

tramways, railways and other works, erections and conveniences which may have been erected, 

set up or placed by the lessee/lessees in or upon the said lands and which the lessee/lessees is/are 

not bound to deliver to the State Government under clause 20 of Part VII of this Schedule and 

which the State Government shall not desire to purchase.  

    

 Forfeiture of property left more than six months after determination of lease: - 

 

 6. If at the end of six calendar months after the expiration or  sooner determination of 

the said term under the provision contained in clause 4 of Part VIII of this Schedule become 

effective there shall remain in or upon the said land any 
2
[ore or mineral] engines, machinery, 

plant, buildings structures, tramways, railways and other work, erections and conveniences or 

other property which are not required by the lessee/lessees in connection with operations in any 

other lands hold by him/them under prospecting licence or mining lease the same shall if not 

removed by the lessee/lessees within one calendar month after notice in writing requiring their 

removal has been given to lessee/lessees by the State Government be deemed to become the 

property of the State Government and may be sold or disposed of in such manner as the State 

Government shall deem fit without liability to pay any compensation or to account to the 

lessee/lessees in respect thereof. 

 

   Notices : - 

 

 7. Every notice by these presents required to be given to the lessee/lessees shall be 

given in writing to such person resident on the said lands as the lessee/lessees may appoint for 

the purpose of  receiving such notices and if there shall have been no such appointment then 

every such notice shall be sent to the lessee/lessees by registered post addressed to the 

lessee/lessees at the address recorded in this lease or at such other address in India as the 

lessee/lessees may from time to time in writing to the  State Government designate for the receipt 

of notices and every such service shall be deemed to be proper and valid service upon the 

lessee/lessees and shall not be questioned or challenged by him/them. 

     

 

 
1. Inserted by G.S.R.No.56 (E), dated 17.1.2000. 
2. Ibid. 



129 
 

 

 

 

  

 

 Immunity of State Government from liability to pay compensation:- 

 

 8. If in any event the orders of the State Government are revised, reviewed or cancelled 

by the Central Government in pursuance of proceedings under Chapter VII of the Mineral 

Concession Rules, 1960, the lessee/lessees shall not be entitled to compensation for any loss 

sustained by the lessee/lessees in exercise of the powers and privileges conferred upon him/them 

by these presents. 

 

 

 8A.The lease is executed at .………… the capital town of the State of  .................... 

(name of the State) and subject to the provision of Article 226 of the Constitution of India, it is 

hereby  agreed upon by the lessee and the lessor that in the event of any dispute in relation to the 

area and lease, condition of lease, the dues realisable under the lease and in respect of all matters 

touching the relationship of the lessee and the lessor, the suits (or appeals) shall be filed in the 

civil courts at ……………….. (name of the city) and it is hereby expressly agreed that neither 

party shall be competent to file a suit or bring any action or file any petition at any place other 

than the courts named above. 

 

 9. For  the  purpose  of  stamp  duty  the  anticipated  royalty  from  the demised land is  

Rs............ per year. 

     

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF these presents have been executed in the manner hereunder 

appearing the day and year first above written. 

                              

 

Signed by 

 

 

for and on behalf of the Governor/President of India in the presence of 

 

 



130 
 

 

 

FORM L 

 

REGISTER OF APPLICATIONS FOR MINING LEASES 

 
(See rule 40(1)] 

 

1.      Serial No. 

2.      Date of application for mining lease. 

3.      Date on which application was received by the Receiving Officer. 

4.      Name of the applicant with full address. 

5.      Situation and boundaries of the land applied for. 

6.      Estimated area of the land. 

7.      Particulars of minerals which the applicant desires to mine. 

8.      Particulars of the prospecting licence if the area applied for is covered by it. 

9.      Application fee paid and preliminary expenses deposited. 

10.    Final disposal of the application together with number and date   of the order. 

11.    Remarks. 

12. Signature of the officer. 
 

 



131 
 

 

 

FORM M 

 

REGISTER OF MINING LEASES 
 

[See rule 40(2)] 

 

 

1.    Serial No. 
2.    Name  of the lessee. 
3.    Residence with complete address of lessee. 
4.      Date of application. 

5.      Date on which application was received by Receiving Officer. 

6.      (a)   Number and date of grant of lease. 

         (b)   Date of execution of mining lease. 

7.      (Omitted) 

8.      Situation and boundaries of the land. 

9.      Total area for which lease has been granted. 

10.    Mineral or minerals for which lease originally granted. 

11.    Mineral or minerals added to the mining lease with date. 

12.    Period for which granted. 

13.    Date and period of renewal. 

14. Date of change together with details of change that take place in name,    
         nationality or other particulars of the holder of mining lease. 

15. Date of assignment of transfer of the lease, if any, and the name and address of  
         the assignee/transferee. 

16.    Date of expiry or relinquishment or cancellation. 

17.    Date from which the area is available for regrant.  

18.    Remarks. 

19.    Signature of the officer. 

 

 



132 
 

 

 

 

FORM-N 

 

"To be submitted in triplicate" 

 

MODEL FORM OF APPLICATION FOR REVISION 

 
(See rule 54) 

 

1.      Name and address of individual/s firm or company applying. 

2.      Profession of individual/s or firm or company. 

3.      (a)     Number and date of order and authority passing the order against which    

                  revision application is filed; 

         (b)    Date of communication of the order to the applicant. 

4.      (a)    Omitted. 

(b)  If the application is in respect of an order made on an application for   
        mineral concession, specify - 

                 (i)     whether for grant or renewal; 

                 (ii)    whether for prospecting licence or for mining lease; 

                 (iii)   date of such application; 

                 (iv)   if for renewal, the number and date of letter of the State Government  

         conveying the grant and the date upto which licence/lease was granted; 

                 (v)    in the case of second or subsequent renewal, the number and date of  

                          letter of earlier grant (s) and date (s) upto which grant (s) have been   

                          made. 

5.      Mineral or minerals for which the revision application is filed. 

6.      Details of the area in respect of which the revision application is filed. 

 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 

              District                  Taluk                          village                 Khasra No. 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 

 

 

 

 

 

Total area claimed. 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 

(A map or plan of the area (s) to be attached.) 

  

7. Whether application fee of Rs. 500/- has been deposited in the manner prescribed 
         in sub-rule (1) of rule 54 of the Mineral Concession  Rules, 1960. If so, treasury 

         receipt or bank draft in original  should be attached. 

 

 



133 
 

 

8. Whether the revision application has been filed within three months of the date  
         of communication of the order passed by the State Government. 

9. If not the reasons for not presenting it within the prescribed limit as provided for  
         in proviso to sub-rule (1) of rule 54 of Mineral Concession Rules, 1960. 

10. Name and complete address of the party/parties impleaded sub- rule (2) of rule 54       
11.    

1
Number of copies of petition attached sub-rule (3) of rule 54. 

12.    Grounds of revision. 

13. If the revision application has been filed by the holder of Power  of Attorney, the  
         Power of Attorney to be attached. 

 

 

                                                                       Yours faithfully, 

 

Place 

Date                                                                 Signature and designation of the applicant 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

______________________________________________________________________________

1. Revision petition is to be submitted in triplicate if no party is impleaded. Besides these, for 

each party impleaded  one additional copy is to be enclosed.     



134 
 

 

 

FORM- O  
 

Model form for transfer of mining lease 

 

(See rule 37 A) 

 

          When the transferor is an individual.................The indenture made 

this.................day of.........……… 20….between............ (Name of the person with 

address and occupation) (hereafter referred to as the "transferor" which  expression 

shall where the context so admits be deemed to include his heirs, executors, 

administrators, representatives and permitted assigns). 

 

          When the transferors are more than one  individual..............(Name of person 

with address and occupation) and …………..............(Name of person with address and 

occupation) (hereinafter referred to as the "transferor" which expression shall  where 

the context so admits be deemed to include their respective  heirs, executors, 

administrators, representatives and permitted  assigns). 

 

          When the transferor is a registered firm..............(Name of  the person with 

address of all the partners) all carrying on business  in partnership under the firm name 

and style of..............(Name of  the firm) registered under the Indian Partnership Act, 

1932(9 of 1932)  and having their registered office at...............(hereinafter  referred to 

as the "transferor" which expression where the context so  admits be deemed to include 

all the said partners, their respective  heirs, executors, legal representatives and 

permitted assigns). 

 

          When the transferor is a registered company ............(Name of Company) a 

company registered under ...............(Act under which  incorporated) and having its 

registered office  at.............(Address)(hereinafter referred to as the "transferor"  which 

expression shall where the context so admits be deemed to  include its successors and 

permitted assigns) of the first part.  

 

          And  

 

          When the transferee is an individual ........... (Name of  person with address 

and occupation) (hereinafter referred to as  the "transferee" which expression shall 

where the context so admits be  deemed to include his heirs, executors, administrators, 

representatives and permitted assigns.).    

 

          When the transferees are more than one individual...........(Name  of the 

person with address and occupation) and  ..............(Name of  person with address and  

occupation)(hereinafter referred to as the "transferee" which expression shall where the 

context so admits be deemed to include their respective heirs, executors, 

administrators,  representatives and permitted assigns).  

   



135 
 

 

          When the transferee is a registered firm............(Name and  address of all the 

partners all carrying on business in partnership  under the firm name and style of) 

..................(Name of the firm)  registered under the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 (9 of 

1932) and having their registered office at...............(hereinafter referred  to as the 

"transferee" which expression where the context so admits be  deemed to include all 

the said partners, their respective heirs, executors, legal representatives and permitted 

assigns). 

 

          When the transferee is a registered company..............(Name of  the Company) 

a company registered under (Act under which incorporated)  and having its registered 

office at ............... (Address)  (hereinafter referred to as the "transferee" which 

expression shall  where the context so admits be deemed to include its successors and  

permitted assigns) of the second part. 

 

          And  

 

          The Governor of .............. (hereinafter referred to as the ‘State Government’ 

which expression shall where the context so admits  be deemed to include the 

successors and assigns) of the third part.  

 

          Whereas by virtues of an indenture of lease dated the ............... and registered as 

No. .................on ......………… (date) in the office of the Sub-registrar of …………….  

(place) (hereinafter referred to as lessee) the original whereof is attached hereto and 

marked `A' entered into between the State Government (therein called the lessor) and 

the transferor (therein called the lessee), the transferor is entitled to search for, win and  

work mines and minerals in respect of..................(Name of mineral/s) in the lands 

described in Schedule thereto and also in Schedule annexed hereto for the term and 

subject to the payment of the rents and royalties and observance and performance of 

the lessee's covenant and conditions in the said deed of lease reserved and  contained 

including a covenant not to assign the lease or any interest  thereunder without the 

previous sanction of the State Government. 

 

          And whereas the transferor is now desirous of transferring and assigning the 

lease to the transferee and the State Government has, at the request of the transferor, 

granted (with the prior approval of the Central Government) permission to the 

transferor vide order No....................dated ............. to such a transfer and assignment of 

the lease upon the condition of the transferees entering into an agreement is and 

containing the terms and conditions hereinafter setforth. 

 

          Now this Deed Witnesseth  follows: 

1.-Omitted. 

2. The transferee hereby covenants with the State Government that from and 

 after the transfer and assignment of the lease the transferee shall be bound by, and be 

liable to perform, observe and conform and be subject to all the provisions of all the 

covenants, stipulations and conditions contained in said hereinbefore recited lease in 

the same manner in all respects as if the lease had been granted to the transferee as the 



136 
 

 

lessee thereunder and he had originally executed it as such.  

           

          3. It is further hereby agreed and declared by the transferor of the one part and 

the transferee of the other part that 

  

(i)  The transferor and the transferee declare that they  have ensured that the  
                   mineral rights over the area for which the mining lease is being transferred    

                   vest in the  State Government. 

 

(ii)   The transferor hereby declares that he has not  assigned, sublet, mortgaged  
        or in any other manner  transferred the mining lease now being transferred  

        and  that no other person or persons has any right, title or  interest where          

        under in the present mining lease being transferred. 

 

(iii) The transferor further declares that he has not  entered into or made any  
        Agreements, contract or understanding whereby  he   had  been  or  is being   

        Directly or indirectly financed to a substantial extent by or  under which the  

        Transferor's  operation or  understandings  were or are  being  substantially  

        controlled by any person or body of persons other than the transferor. 

 

(iv)    The transferee hereby declares that he/she has  accepted all the conditions  

        and liabilities  which the  transferor was  having in respect of such mining  

        licence. 

 

 (v)    The transferee further declares that he is  financially capable of and will 

        directly undertake mining operations. 

 

          (vi)  The transferee further declares that he has filed  an affidavit stating that he  

                  has filed up-to-date income tax returns, paid the income tax assessed on him  

                  and paid the income tax on the basis of self-assessment as  provided in the  

                  Income Tax Act, 1961, (43 of 1961).  

 

(vii) The transferor has supplied to the transferee the  original or certified  
        Copies of all plans of abandoned  workings in the area and in a belt 65  

        Metres wide  surrounding it. 

 

(viii) The transferee hereby further declares that as a consequence of this  
          Transfer, the total area while  held by him under mineral concessions are  

          not  in  contravention of Section 6 of the Mines and Minerals  

          (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 or rule 35 of the  Mineral      

          Concession Rules, 1960. 

 

(ix)    The transferor has paid all the rent, royalties,  and other dues towards  
        Government till the date, in  respect of this lease. 

 

 



137 
 

 

 

          In witness whereof the parties hereto have signed on the date and year first above 

written. 

    

 
 

SCHEDULE  

 

Location and area of the lease 
 

All that tract of lands situated at .................……………………………….. 

(Description of area or areas) .......................………… in (Pargana) in 

……………………………the Registration Distt................... Sub 

District...........…………..and Thana…….............bearing Cadestral Survey 

Nos.………................. containing an area of ...................................or thereabout 

delineated on the plan hereto annexed and thereon coloured …………………………...  

and bounded as follows:- 

 

 

          ON THE NORTH BY 

          ON THE SOUTH BY 

          ON THE EAST BY 

          AND 

          ON THE WEST BY 

 

 

Signed by 

for and on behalf of the State Govt. in the presence of 

 

1. 

 

2. 

 

Signature of transferor in the presence of witnesses 

 

1. 

 

2. 

                                                                            

                             Signature of transferee in the presence of  

                                           

                                          1. 

                                          2.  

 

 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------                                  



138 
 

 

1
[ FORM-P  

  
 

Model form for transfer of prospecting licence 

 

(See rule 15A) 

 

          When the transferor is an individual..............…………….This indenture made  

this.................day of.........……… 20….between............ (Name of the person with 

address and occupation) (hereinafter referred to as the "transferor" which  expression 

shall where the context so admits be deemed to include his heirs, executors, 

administrators, representatives and permitted assigns). 

 

          When the transferors are more than one  individual.............(Name of persons 

with address and occupation) and ………….............(Name of persons with address and 

occupation) (hereinafter referred to as the "transferor" which expression shall  where 

the context so admits be deemed to include their respective  heirs, executors, 

administrators, representatives and permitted  assigns). 

 

          When the transferor is a registered firm..............(Name of  the person with 

address of all the partners) all carrying on business  in partnership under the firm name  

and style of..............(Name of  the firm) registered under the Indian Partnership Act, 

1932 (9 of 1932)  and having their registered office at...............(hereinafter  referred to 

as the "transferor" which expression shall where the context so  admits be deemed to 

include all the said partners, their respective  heirs, executors, legal representatives and 

permitted assigns). 

 

          When the transferor is a registered company ............(Name of the Company) 

a company registered under ...............(Act under which  incorporated) and having its 

registered office  at.............(Address) (hereinafter referred to as the "transferor"  which 

expression shall where the context so admits be deemed to  include its successors and 

permitted assigns) of the first part.  

 

          AND  

 

          When the transferee is an individual ........... (Name of  person with address 

and occupation) (hereinafter referred to as  the "transferee" which expression shall 

where the context so admits be deemed to include his heirs, executors, administrators, 

representatives and permitted assigns).    

 

          When the transferees are more than one individual.....………....(Name  of the 

person with address and occupation) and  ..............(Name of  person with address and  

occupation) (hereinafter referred to as the "transferee" which expression shall where 

the context  so  admits  be  deemed  to  include  their  respective  heirs,  executors,  

______________________________________________________________________
1.  Inserted by G.S.R. No. 31 (E), dated 22.1.2001. 



139 
 

 

 

administrators,  representatives and permitted assigns).  

   

          When the transferee is a registered firm............(Name and  address of all the 

partners) all carrying on business in partnership  under the firm name and style of 

..................(Name of the firm)  registered under the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 (9 of 

1932) and having their registered office at...............(hereinafter referred  to as the 

"transferee" which expression where the context so admits be  deemed to include all 

the said partners, their respective heirs, executors, legal representatives and permitted 

assigns). 

 

          When the transferee is a registered company..............(Name of  the Company) 

a company registered under ……………(Act under which incorporated)  and having its 

registered office at ............... (Address)  (hereinafter referred to as the "transferee" 

which expression shall  where the context so admits be deemed to include its 

successors and permitted assigns) of the second part. 

 

          AND  

 

          The Governor of .............. (hereinafter referred to as the ‘State Government’ 

which expression shall where the context so admits  be deemed to include the 

successors and assigns) of the third part.  

 

          Whereas by virtue of an indenture of licence dated the ............…..…… and 

registered as No. .................on ......………… (date) in the office of the Sub-registrar of 

…………………..(place) (hereinafter referred to as licensor) the original whereof is 

attached hereto and marked `A' entered into between the State Government (therein 

called the licensor) and the transferor (therein called the licensee), the transferor is 

entitled to search for, the minerals in respect of..................(Name of mineral(s) in the 

lands described in the Schedule thereto and also in Schedule annexed hereto for the 

term and subject to the payment of prospecting and other fees and royalties and 

observance and performance of the licensee's covenant and conditions in the said deed 

of licence reserved and  contained including a covenant not to assign the licence or any 

interest  thereunder without the previous sanction of the State Government. 

 

          And whereas the transferor is now desirous of transferring and assigning the 

licence to the transferee and the State Government has, at the request of the transferor, 

granted permission to the transferor vide order No....................dated ............. to such a 

transfer and assignment of the licence upon the condition of the transferee entering into 

an agreement in and containing the terms and conditions hereinafter setforth. 

 

          Now this Deed Witnesseth as follows: 

 

1.       The transferee hereby covenants with the State Government that from and after 

the transfer and assignment of the licence, the transferee shall be bound by, and be 

liable to perform, observe and conform and be subject to all the provisions of all the 



140 
 

 

covenants, stipulations and conditions contained in said hereinbefore recited licence in 

the same manner in all respects as if the licence had been granted to the transferee as 

the licensee thereunder and he had originally executed it as such. 

 

2.      It is further hereby agreed and declared by the transferor of the one part and the 

transferee of the other part that - 

  

(i)   the transferor and the transferee declare that they  have ensured that the            

mineral rights over the area for which the prospecting licence is being transferred        

vest in the  State Government; 

 

(ii)  the transferor hereby declares that he has not  assigned, sublet, mortgaged or in any 

other manner  transferred the prospecting licence now being transferred   and  that no 

other person or persons has any right, title or  interest where under in the present 

prospecting licence being transferred; 

 

(iii) the transferor further declares that he has not  entered into or made any         

agreement, contract or understanding whereby  he   had  been  or  is being directly or 

indirectly financed to a substantial extent by or  under which the transferor's  operation 

or  understandings  were or are  being  substantially controlled by any person or body 

or persons other than the transferor; 

 

(iv)  the transferee hereby declares that he has accepted all the conditions and liabilities  

which the  transferor was  having in respect of such prospecting licence; 

 

(v)   the transferee further declares that he is  financially capable of and will directly 

undertake prospecting operations; 

 

(vi)  the transferee further declares that he has filed  an affidavit stating that he has filed 

up-to-date income tax returns, paid the income tax assessed on him and paid the 

income tax on the basis of self-assessment as  provided in the Income Tax Act, 1961, 

(43 of 1961);  

 

(vii) the transferor has supplied to the transferee the  original/or certified  copies of all 

plans of exploration and abandoned pits in the area and in a belt of 65 meters wide  

surrounding it; 

 

(viii)  the transferee hereby further declares that as a consequence of this transfer, the 

total areas held by him under mineral concessions are not  in  contravention of section 

6 of the Mines and Minerals  (Development  and Regulation) Act, 1957 (67 of 1957); 

 

(ix)    the transferor has paid all the prospecting and other fees, royalties,  and other 

dues towards Government till the date, in  respect of this licence. 

 

 

 



141 
 

 

 

 

 

          In witness whereof the parties hereto have signed on the date and year first above 

written. 

    

SCHEDULE  

 

Location and area of the licence: 
 

 

         All that tract of lands situated at …………………..…………….. (Description of  

areas) .......................… in             (Pargana)                in ……………………………the 

District................….. Sub-District...........………….and        Thana…….............bearing 

Cadestral Survey Nos.………........………………………......… containing  an  area  of  

...................................or thereabout delineated on the plan hereto annexed and thereon 

coloured..........……………………………. and bounded as follows:- 

 

 

          ON THE NORTH BY 

          ON THE SOUTH BY 

          ON THE EAST BY 

          AND 

          ON THE WEST BY 

 

 

Signed by 

for and on behalf of the State Government in presence of 

 

1. 

 

2. 

 

Signature of transferor in the presence of witnesses 

 

1. 

 

2. 

 

                             Signature of transferee in the presence of  

                                           

                                          1. 

 

                                                        2.              ] 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------                                   

 



142 
 

 

 
1[SCHEDULE II 

[See rule 9(2)(a)] 

Application fee for prospecting licences 

 

(1) For first square kilometre or part thereof two hundred and fifty rupees. 

(2) For each additional square kilometre fifty rupees. ]  

 

SCHEDULE III 
[See rule 14(1) (ii) (a) & (b)] 

Maximum quantities of ores and minerals removable 

 
 

 

Class 

 

 

Mineral/ore 

 

Quantities that 

can be carried 

away without 

any payment 

Maximum 

quantity that 

can be carried 
away by 

payment of 

royalty 

1 2 3 4 
Class-I Asbestos, graphite, mica, native sulphur, auriferous rock 

with visible uranium mineral and uranium bearing 

minerals, minerals of rare earths group, beryl, tantalite, 

columbite-concentrates of ores of antimony, arsenic, 

bismuth, chromium, copper, lead, nickel, tin, titanium, 

tungsten, zinc. 

 

250 kg 10 tonnes 

Class-II Auriferous rock and gravel containing no visible gold, 
metalliferous ores meant for extracting cadmium, cobalt, 

mercury, molybdenum, silver, helium, vanadium, barytes, 

bitumen, borax, corundum, emery, grossularite, felspar, 

fluorspar and calcite. 

 

5 tonnes 200 tonnes 

Class-III Uraniferous rock without visible uranium minerals, 
metalliferous ores meant for extracting antimony, arsenic, 

bismuth, chromium, copper, lead, nickel, tin, titanium, 

tungsten, zinc and compound ores containing metals of 

cadmium, cobalt, mercury, molybdenum, silver, helium 

and vanadium, gypsum, limestone, iron pyrites, shales, red 

& yellow ochre, bauxite, metalliferous ores meant for 

extracting aluminium, iron and manganese. 

 

10 tonnes 200 tonnes 

Class-IV Limestone, sillimanite, kyanite, magnesite, serpentine, 
steatite, vermiculite, fireclay, kaolin and other refractory 

materials, coal and lignite. 

 

50 tonnes 200 tonnes 

Class-V All other minerals not specified above. 10 tonnes 200 tonnes 
 

1 Substituted by G.S.R. 21 (E), dated 11.1.2002. 
 



143 
 

 

SCHEDULE  IV 
 

Omitted by G.S.R. 1010, dated 15.9.1973 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

SCHEDULE  V 
Institutions/Banks/Corporations 

(See rule 37) 

 

1. A Scheduled Bank as defined in clause (e) of Section 2 of the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934). 

2. A Bank specified in column 2 of the First Schedule to the Banking Companies  
           (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970). 

3.        A Finance Corporation owned and controlled by a State Government. 

4.        A State Industrial Development Corporation. 

5.        Unit Trust of India. 

6.        Industrial Finance Corporation of India. 

7.        State Trading Corporation of India. 

8.        Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India. 

9.        Life Insurance Corporation of India. 

10.      Industrial Development Bank of India. 

11.      Industrial Reconstruction Corporation of India Ltd., Kolkata. 

12.      State Industrial Corporation of Maharashtra. 

13. General Insurance Corporation of India and its four subsidiaries, viz. (1) Oriental  
Insurance Co., New Delhi, (2) New India Assurance Co., Mumbai, (3) National  

           Insurance Co., Kolkata and (4) United Insurance Co., Chennai. 

14.      The Export and Import Bank of India. 

15.      The National Bank of Agriculture and Rural Development. 
  

 

 

 

 

 


